Jae Bates 
Narrator 
Andrea Jenkins 
Interviewer 
Andrea Jenkins -AJ 
Jae Bates -JB 
AJ: Good afternoon. My name is Andrea Jenkins and I am the oral historian for the Transgender 
Oral History Project at the Tretter Collection at the University of Minnesota. Today is June 28, 
2016, and I am at the Edina Public Library and I’m talking to a young person by the name of Jae 
Bates. And so, Jae, could you introduce yourself? Spell your name, state your gender identity 
today, your gender assigned at birth, and the pronouns that you use. 
JB: My name is Jae Bates. I spell it J-a-e B-a-t-e-s. I identify as a trans man or a trans male. I was 
assigned female at birth. I use he/him pronouns. Is that ...? 
AJ: That was pretty much it. Thank you so much. So it’s a pleasure to be with you today, Jae. We 
had scheduled our interview for ... almost a year ago in Seattle because you’re a student at the 
University of Puget Sound in Washington State. 
JB: Yeah, in Tacoma. 
AJ: And for whatever reasons that didn’t work out so I’m very happy that we get a chance to sit 
down again today. So Jae, tell me what’s your earliest memory in life. 
JB: My earliest memory ... I think the earliest memory I have that is very vivid would be ... actually 
also related to my gender, coincidently – probably because it was one of the hardest memories 
from my childhood. I used to play baseball when I was a kid, just the local baseball team – 
whatever, down the street. I’d say I was maybe in 2nd or 3rd grade and I said to my mom, “Oh, 
the coach said that everybody needs to get nut cups because that’s ... you know, we need to do 
that.” I just thought I was like every other boy on my team and the coach said that so I had to 
do that. And my mom kind of just laughed at me and then turned to her friend and laughed and 
told her what I had said and said, “Oh, don’t kids say just the funniest things, isn’t this just so 
funny.” And I genuinely did not understand why is this funny, why are you laughing. 
AJ: Yeah, like, “We need to go to Target and get this thing.” 
JB: “I’m not going to be able to play.” I guess what I wasn’t understanding was that there were 
differences in my body and what she wasn’t understanding was that I didn’t understand I wasn’t 
a boy. So I remember very distinctly going home and being very upset that she had laughed and 
not understanding why we didn’t have a conversation about it, she just thought I was confused 
about what the coach had said. And so, that’s probably one of my earliest vivid memories ­ 
walking through the parking lot, having her tell people, “Oh, isn’t this so funny, my child said 
this.” So I remember that being one of my most early memories and also just ... it was almost 
traumatic but it wasn’t even because she did anything that was vicious, it was just like, “I’m 
confused.” So that’s actually one of my earliest memories. 
AJ: How old do you think you were at that time? JB: Probably 8. Yeah, I was probably eight. I knew that people used she/her pronouns for me and I 
knew that people called me a girl but I just thought that words were just words. I was like, “OK, 
you can call me that but I’m a boy and I know that.” I thought I was just like all the other boys. 
AJ: How long have you known that you are a boy? Clearly it was before you were eight. 
JB: Yeah. Probably when I was four, whenever it is that kids kind of start to tell you what they like 
and what they don’t like and I could dress myself and say this is what I want to wear. So ever 
since I was four it was like, “I want short hair,” and would do masculine things and like knew 
that I was a boy. I have a brother and most of my cousins are boys and so I grew up just thinking, 
“Oh, I do all these same things, I’m just like all the other boys.” Always played on boy’s 
recreational teams. 
AJ: Really? 
JB: Or co-ed teams. It was weird because co-ed teams were fine because we’re all just playing 
together. So probably as early as four, but didn’t know that people didn’t see me that way. 
AJ: Right. Did you ever talk to people or tell anyone about it? 
JB: I don’t distinctly ever telling my mom, “I’m a boy,” but I loved imaginative plays, I loved to role 
play when I was a kid, and it was always ... I think there were some big red flags, there would 
be some big signs. I would always play male characters, I would always want to be the dad, you 
know – like in house, I would take on male roles and say, “This is who I am.” 
AJ: Sure. 
JB: I think in the early 2000s and late 1990s, my parents were really familiar with the idea of like 
tomboy and so it was like, “Oh, that’s pretty typical, that’s fine.” So it was hard because I never 
really felt comfortable articulating to them, “I’m a boy,” but I was sending some pretty strong 
signals. 
AJ: Wow. So what was your home environment like? You said you have one sibling? 
JB: Yeah, I have one older brother. My older brother is also adopted, he’s right now. So he’s 23, 
it was just him and I growing up and then my parents are together. So just my parents, my 
brother and I. 
AJ: Where? Where did you grow up? 
JB: Originally, when I was like a baby, we lived on kind of the edge of Edina and Hopkins and then 
we moved to the border of Hopkins and Minnetonka. So I kind of identify with Hopkins as my 
hometown. I went to Hopkins High School, most of my friends live in Hopkins. I’m right on the 
border of multiple suburbs so I also sometimes just say I grew up in the west suburbs because 
it’s kind of the easiest thing to indicate where I grew up. 
AJ: But Minnesota is where you grew up at? 
JB: Yeah, Minnesota. I was born in South Korea in 1996 and my mother was, at the time, unwed, 
escaping a bad marriage, she has two other children. Met my father, they had a thing, but she 
The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies 
University of Minnesota didn’t trust him so she gave me up – she tried to raise me so I lived with her for about five 
months, she couldn’t do it just because she was unemployed and didn’t have a college 
education. So she put me up for adoption and I was adopted at almost one-year-old. I came to 
the U.S. and then grew up in Minnesota my whole life. 
AJ: Wow. That’s quite a story. I know that there are a lot of, particularly Korean adoptees, but ... 
JB: Yeah. 
AJ: But many other ... 
JB: I just did a ton of research about that actually. 
AJ: Is that right? 
JB: Yeah. It comes out of the Korean War, heavily out of war time. So Vietnam, Korea, and China 
are the big three where people tend to be adopted from in Asia. 
AJ: I was going to mention and just kind of see what your thoughts are, is that so many people are 
becoming politically active around being trans-racially adopted. What do you think about that? 
Are you involved with that movement at all? 
JB: I follow it a lot, there’s a big movement to end international adoptions. It’s a big form of 
imperialism, it’s very ... mostly from countries that are majority people of color to the U.S. So a 
lot of white families, and then even just domestic adoption is heavily race savior-y. 
AJ: Savior-y. I like that phrase. 
JB: And I very much follow the movement of folks that are ... there’s actually two women, I think, 
from Minnesota who work heavily on trying to change policies both in Korea and in the United 
States. 
AJ: JaeRan Kim and Sun Yung Shin. 
JB: Yeah, to slow down and stop international adoption. And then there’s the other side which is 
the heavily Christian Evangelical groups that are trying to increase international adoption. And 
so, I haven’t gotten super into it. I started to run into it a lot when I got to college but most of it 
was actually here in Minnesota or it’s in Korea. There are a lot of adoptees who moved back to 
Korea actually in order to affect policy change there – and do politics there. It’s easier to stop 
the flow of it from the sources. 
AJ: From the source, as it is to do it from the United States. Thank you for just sharing that. I mean 
I’m not trying to stir up anything but I just know it’s a really big movement and it’s a real issue 
and just kind of wanted to hear what your thoughts around it are. 
JB: Yeah, I definitely ... I did a project actually about the effect of international adoption on the 
racial identities, particularly of like Korean-American adoptee kids because it contributes to the 
production of white-wash Asian kids and kind of the whole idea of Asian advantage and all these 
things that I grew up really grappling with and not fully understanding what it meant to be Asian 
American with white parents and not connecting with other people of color because I felt very 
The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies 
University of Minnesota distanced from white people, because I’m obviously not white. I grew up with a lot of troubles 
and confusion around identity, more particularly to my race than almost anything else. 
AJ: Even more so than your gender? 
JB: Yeah, I think gender was more clear cut for me. 
AJ: Really? 
JB: This is what I’m doing, this is who I am – let’s go for it. My adoption and race is particularly what 
I’m still working on the most and talking to people about the most and talking about it in 
therapy the most. 
AJ: That’s fascinating to me. 
JB: Really trying to work through it, but yeah, I completely support the end of international 
adoption and have had some very complicated conversations with my mom about it. She really 
understands why but also understands the other end of it’s a beautiful thing for the parents and 
it’s not necessarily entirely negative for the child – it’s just that there are different negative 
things. 
AJ: It’s complicated. 
JB: So it’s just a trade-off. I would have grown up in poverty, like in complete poverty if I’d have 
stayed there and maybe not have been able to come out as trans. But here I had so many issues 
around race and racialized bullying and stuff like that. So it’s just a trade-off, you never really 
know. 
AJ: So you were bullied in school? 
JB: Oh yeah. I went to ... so there are two junior highs in the Hopkins district, West Junior High 
and North Junior High. Hopkins is a very racially diverse ... 
AJ: Which one did you go to? 
JB: I went to West Junior High. Hopkins is a very racially diverse district, more so than the other 
districts in the west metro because ... 
AJ: Interestingly, but it is. 
JB: Yeah, we give the most money to open enrollment so we allow the most amount of people to 
open enroll in our district as opposed to Minnetonka or Wayzata or Eden Prairie. So we service 
suburbs all the way up to ... there are kids all the way up from Brooklyn Park, Robbinsdale, into 
North Minneapolis. There are families from South Minneapolis. We service the widest area and 
a ton of Hmong kids in particular from Minneapolis and St. Paul as well. We have a larger 
English as a Second Language program, all that stuff. My parents chose specifically to live in the 
Hopkins district because they wanted me to go to a more racially diverse K-12, which is great, 
but it still didn’t fix kind of the problems that they thought that that would alleviate. I think it 
did more so than if I had gone to Eden Prairie or Minnetonka. I think that that would have been 
a lot worse for a lot of different reasons. In junior high I got bullied a lot for both my sexuality 
The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies 
University of Minnesota and my race. The bullying about my sexuality, or my gender identity ... it was more about my gender expression at the time, which they thought was tied up in my sexuality because I had come out as queer. But it was really typical and it was straight forward. It was, “OK, they hate me because I’m queer and that’s fine because I know that they’re wrong.” It was very straight forward and I could just ignore it. But the bullying especially about my race was more ... coming even from people that I considered friends and so it was racism that was very normalized and just coming from people who I thought I cared about and even other people of color and other Asian kids. It was just very constant kind of jabs at particularly my ... like where I’m adopted from. Something I get a lot is kids make jokes about Kung Jung-il to me or call me that when I was in school and call me like a Communist or a Commie, which now that’s not such a ... whatever. But it was very, “You’re this and you come from a fascist country.” Just assumptions that I was from North Korea, which is weird, I’m from South Korea. And I was always very adamant about that. I was very into being South Korean when I was in junior high because people were always attacking me and I just wanted to so badly be like, “This is who I am, this is where I’m from. I love it.” I always wanted to cook Korean food when I was in junior high. I did a lot of cooking when I was in junior high. I wanted to learn how to cook all the Korean food that I had eaten at camps and stuff like that. But yeah, kids would just ... I used to get called chink a lot when I was in junior high. I would also get called ... the weirdest thing is a lot of kids would know the word gook, which I thought was weird because I was like that’s a pretty generational specific racial slur. 
AJ: Right, and sort of Vietnam-era. 
JB: And so this kid called me, I remember it distinctly – I was in junior high and this kid called me a gook. I was like, “Do you hang out with a lot of Vietnam-war vets? Do you have Vietnam War vets in your family?” I didn’t, at that moment, know what that word even meant and then I had told somebody that this kid called me that and they had to explain to me what that meant. At the time, I was like, “I know that’s not nice, I know that this word is not nice.” 
AJ: Yeah, it wasn’t a cool thing but you didn’t know exactly what it meant. 
JB: I just remember that being really weird. But yeah, I used to get called chink, gook, kind of all the different racial slurs related to my eyes – all those slurs under the rainbow about Asian kids, I used to get called in school. And the weird thing was when it was coming from my friends, they thought it was funny, like, “Oh, we can call you this, it’s fun.” But because I was sometimes one of the only people of color in my friend group, I would be like, “Oh, ha-ha, yeah – whatever, that’s funny.” And kind of just roll with it and then would start to make jokes, to pre-empt their jokes, Iike, “I’m going to make jokes about myself so that you can’t.” 
AJ: Sort of a protection mechanism kind of thing. 
JB: Yeah, so then it’s kind of like they’re not making it about me, I’m making it about me and they can laugh with me instead of at me. So yeah, and so that turned into something that was really hard – and then eventually I just kind of learned if I don’t want people to talk about race with me, or bully me for race, or bring up my race, then I just have to act as white as possible, or I just have to not ever talk about race. So then somewhere at the end of junior high it was kind of complicated, I didn’t want to talk about South Korea anymore, I didn’t want to do cultural things anymore. My other friends who were Asian American students, we had had this group for a 
while where we would all cook dinner together and hang out and watch foreign films. And that 
was really cool for me and then towards the end of junior high when white kids started to say, 
“Oh, you guys are being reverse racist, this is whatever.” And white kids started making a big 
thing about it, all my friends kind of slowly started to drop out because they didn’t want people 
to start calling them about their race. Mostly all my friends in that group just started to drop 
out, like, “Oh, I don’t want to do this anymore, I don’t want to meet anymore, I don’t want to 
hang out.” And we all just kind of separated because they didn’t want to talk about it anymore, 
they didn’t want to do anything. 
AJ: Sure, wow. 
JB: That was my experience in junior high and particularly around bullying and race, in particular. 
AJ: Did it impact your studies at all? I’m going to go out on a limb and say you’re probably a pretty 
good student because you got accepted into a really good college. 
JB: Yeah. So high school I did really, really well. Junior high was harder. So junior high was when I 
was trying to figure out my gender expression and my sexuality, while simultaneously getting 
bullied about race and so it was literally everyone just coming at every part of my identity. 
AJ: Yeah, because you mentioned earlier that you came out as queer pretty early. 
JB: Yeah. 
AJ: How old were you? 
JB: The end of 7th grade, early 8th grade. 
AJ: So 13, 14-years-old. 
JB: Yeah, I think probably when I came out as queer, as liking women. So that would have been, 
at the time ... I identified as gay because I was identified by other people as a woman who liked 
women. And then it was funny, one of my ... 
AJ: But you’re really a straight guy. 
JB: Well I still identify as queer. My sexuality developed more as I figured out more parts of who I 
was. But the only boy that I had ever tried to date, came out like a year after me as gay. And so 
when I came out as trans, as a trans man, we had Panera together and he was joking at Panera, 
like, “Oh, we could actually date again, it would be fun.” 
AJ: Did you? 
JB: No, but we’re really good friends. It just is funny. 
AJ: Because now that you’re a man, he could go out with you then. That is funny, that is hilarious. 
JB: We’re really good friends. But junior high was tough. I was trying to figure out sexuality so I’d 
come out and I thought that would fix ... because I was very depressed and I thought, “This is it 
– cool, I know I like women, that was the problem, I was sad because I didn’t know who I was 
The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies 
University of Minnesota and then I came out.” And then everyone was like, “Oh, this is so great.” And everyone was 
very accepting and Hopkins became known for being one of the more LGBT-friendly schools out 
there. I was like, “This is it, this is going to be good.” It helped a little but it wasn’t quite ... I 
was still not really able to focus on school, so I got pretty bad grades in 7th and 8th grade in 
particular. Just couldn’t focus, wasn’t really asking for help, I didn’t really ... I just wasn’t good 
at partnering up with people because I was afraid of other kids judging me and I wasn’t very 
outgoing. I didn’t want to do the partner work and I just kind of was in my own world. I didn’t 
want to do things with other kids. So yeah, I got pretty bad grades – particularly in 7th and 8th 
grade. Ninth grade it was kind of, “Kick your butt into gear otherwise this isn’t going to work 
out.” Ninth grade, you’re still at the junior high but you’re getting graded for high school. And 
then 9th grade was when I started to figure more stuff out and was able to take classes more 
that I was really, really interested in and learn about things that related to who I was. So I 
started to do better in 9th grade and particularly the middle of high school was really, really 
great for me just because I was able ... I came out as trans at the very beginning of high school 
– like 10th, 11th – like that. 
AJ: You came out as trans? 
JB: Yeah. I had just turned when I came out as trans. And so I was able to ... 
AJ: Who was the first person you told? 
JB: I remember I used to work at the Minnesota Zoo and I was sitting before ... I did kid camps 
there, I was like a camp counselor, and I was sitting before that and I realized, “OK, I need to tell 
somebody,” and I texted my friend Tia, who I was at Pride with this past weekend. I said, “Tia, 
I’ve got to tell you something, I identify as a boy and I want to use he/him pronouns and I chose 
this name. I’m trans.” I remember her being just very, very supportive – it was great. And then 
I texted a couple more people. The more, I think, that I got positive responses the more 
comfortable I felt just telling more people. Actually the reason that I figured out that I was trans 
was my ex-girlfriend’s ex is a trans man and I had hung out with him a lot while I was early high 
school and started to talk to him about his experience and who he was a little bit. He would 
share just bits and pieces, he wasn’t as open with his identity necessarily. But he could kind of 
tell I was kind of struggling with gender so he would talk to me. And then I got on the internet 
and YouTube, and that’s how I figured out I was trans – just kind of reading more and learning 
more about the way that people identify and just realizing that’s who I am and that’s who I 
identify as. For a long time I had known about the word gender queer and thought that kind of 
applies to me. I would tell people, “Oh my gender is more like gender queer,” but I wasn’t using 
any particular pronouns. I didn’t really know what that meant but I just know that I’m not a 
woman. And so before I came out as trans, I was just kind of telling people, “Oh, my gender is a 
little bit more gender queer but I don’t think I’m a trans man.” And then eventually it was just 
like, “I can’t ...” I had bought myself a binder online without telling my parents and just kind of 
was trying to get through it and then just realized at the beginning of high school, “I can’t do this 
anymore.” So I just decided to come out. My mom was the first person in my family that I told. 
AJ: So how did they deal with this? You had already come out as queer in 7th grade. 
The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies 
University of Minnesota Jae Bates 
JB: Yeah, I remember ... so the first time I came out, I went on a walk with my dad actually and 
then at the end of the walk we were getting our mail and he turns to get the mail and I just 
blurted out, “Dad, I think I’m gay.” And then my dad said, “Oh, you know, we’ll always love you 
– you could be whatever and we’d still love you. You could turn into a rabbit and I’d still love 
you.” Whatever. 
AJ: I’m sorry. 
JB: I said, “OK, cool, I’m just telling you I’m gay.” 
AJ: “We’ll just give you carrots and ...” 
JB: So he was just kind of ... “You could be whatever and we’d still love you.” So then I 
remembered that as I was trying to come out as trans – OK, he said no matter what they’ll love 
me, so it will be OK. I texted my mom and told her and then I remember I purposefully went 
over to my friend’s house for dinner because I didn’t want to be home, so I texted my mom this 
really long text and I was like, “I’m trans and this is what that means. I want to go by this name 
and these pronouns.” And just this really, really long text and waiting for her reply was very 
painful, nerve-racking. Finally she responded and she’s like, “OK, that’s OK, I’ve known this for a 
while, but you need to come home – you can’t stay at your friends.” And I was like, “Shoot, that 
was my buffer.” So I went home and she was cooking dinner and she kind of didn’t say anything 
and then she just started crying when we were eating dinner and I was like, “What’s wrong? Are 
you OK?” And she told me that mostly she was really upset about violence against trans people 
and what does that mean for me. She knows about just systemic violence against trans people 
and so she said it was OK but what does this mean for college and where am I going to go and 
how am I going to make sure it’s going to be OK, the cost of transitional care and how am I going 
to afford that and who is going to do that and where do we find it. It was just more ... she 
works a lot in logistics and she thinks about the details. So she was like obviously going through 
the emotional mourning of her child changing but she was also very stressed out about, “You’re 
still a minor so we together have to do this if you want to do this.” And so her questions were 
all about safety and logistics and what’s going to happen. So for a long time she was like, “I 
don’t want you to leave the metro area, I don’t want you to leave Minneapolis or this area for 
college, you should just go to the U of M.” I don’t have a problem with the U of M but I always 
thought a smaller school would be better for the way that I learn. 
AJ: Yeah, that’s huge – that’s a huge school. 
JB: So I was really scared – like, “I just locked myself into ...” If it was between transitioning and 
having to go to the U of M, that would be fine. But yeah, my mom just kind of said, “I don’t 
want you moving anywhere else, I want you to live here near me for the rest of your life.” And I 
was like, “I’ve got to get out of here.” I’d always imagined, at least moving away to see a 
different part ... for just a small bit. I love Minneapolis, I’d love to maybe move back but I don’t 
want to be constricted to that. So yeah, her things were mostly safety, what are we doing. My 
dad when I came out, his reaction was, at first, he literally said the word ... I was at Pizza Luce 
with him for dinner and my mom went to the bathroom and I told him, “Dad, I’m trans.” Just 
blurted it out again. AJ: Wow. 
JB: And he takes a sip of his beer and he just goes, “No, you’re not.” And I was like, “OK, sounds 
good, let’s just eat our pizza.” And then that was it, we didn’t talk about it again. I think more 
what he meant was ... he knows that being trans is a thing and it’s real and that’s OK, but he 
just felt more like, “I think that your gender is different and I think you express it differently, but 
I don’t think you’re a trans person.” So his reaction was just denial – just kind of like, “No, 
you’re not, you’re a masculine woman, that’s OK, don’t let anyone tell you that’s not OK but 
you’re not trans.” And so just at dinner I just didn’t want to fight about it, but I just kind of 
swallowed it back in and was like, “We’ll have this conversation later.” And I think for him it 
really took the therapist saying it. He’s really, to be honest, like a little more elitist – kind of like, 
“I need a professional to tell me that these things are happening. I’ll listen to your doctors and 
I’ll listen to the therapist but just kind of not being able to listen to me about who I am and just 
him being like, ‘I’ve known you for16 years and this isn’t what you’re doing’.” 
AJ: Like, “You’re not the expert on your life, I am.” 
JB: Yeah. So it was very like that and I was like, “OK, sounds good.” So I went to the program at the 
University of Minnesota. 
AJ: Oh really, the Program on Human Sexuality. 
JB: Yes. And so the therapist there, we did a couple of first appointments and then sat my parents 
down and said ... I think,at the time they were still calling it gender dysphoria -it was still on 
the DSM at the time I had come out and then it came off the DSM the next year or something 
like that. They finally told my parents, “This is what’s happening, if you support him you’re 
going to have to go with whatever he says.” And that’s kind of when my dad started to finally 
realize he couldn’t just ignore it. But yeah, they took it relatively well compared to other 
people. After the initial coming out it took them a very long period of ... like a very, very long 
period of adjustment to do pronouns and name. My therapist had to have us do a gender jar 
where they have to put coins in every time they misgender me – when I had first come out, they 
don’t misgender me as much anymore. 
AJ: Did you get to keep the money or did they? 
JB: I got to keep it. So my parents would have to put in coins every time they misgendered me. I 
think I made like $5.00 but I was like, “OK.” And that was kind of what it took to get them to just 
... 
AJ: What about your brother? How did your brother handle things? 
JB: Yeah, so he was in college at that point. I think he was a freshman in college – or a sophomore 
in college when I came out. So he was away and I didn’t really know how to talk to him about 
it. I think my mom ended up talking to him about it because I ... I’ve never had a super, super 
close relationship with my brother where we can talk about feelings or emotions or 
experiences. So I kind of let my mom do it, she asked me if she could and I told her she 
could. So that’s what she did. And then he messaged me about it, sent me a long message 
supporting me, telling me he still loved me. But then kind of ... as he started to see all of the 
The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies 
University of Minnesota Jae Bates 
things that I had to go through and the stress that it was putting on my mom, my brother is very 
intuitive about people’s feelings and so he gets very upset by other people being upset. He 
came back from college, I think maybe for winter break or something, and he said, “Can’t you 
just be who you are and tell people this, but just remain the way that you are?” So kind of, 
“Can’t you just socially transition but not do all these documents and this medical?” I think he 
was just more stressed out by ... 
AJ: “Can’t you just make us feel comfortable?” Basically. 
JB: Yeah, like really like that and kind of ... it wasn’t even for his sake, he just hates when my 
parents get stressed out. So it was really just, “Can’t you just not do this so that mom and dad . . 
.?” 
AJ: So mom and dad can be OK. 
JB: Yeah. And so, that was definitely hurtful. Eventually he understood why different parts of 
transition are really important. He’s a lot better, particularly in the last year. All his friends that 
he still hangs out with, he hung out with in high school, so they all knew me before I came out, 
but none of his friends have ever misgendered me or deadening to me in our house, so he very 
clearly ... I don’t know if it was him or my parents – like I don’t know who it was, but clearly 
they laid it down for his friends that this is what’s happening. His friends are very respectful, 
very nice to me. And so clearly he’s done some stuff on his own that maybe we haven’t talked 
about before. And then him and his girlfriend, they came to some of the Trans Ally Trainings 
that I was doing. 
AJ: Nice. 
JB: He definitely tries. The couple years I marched in Pride he came with his girlfriend and my 
parents to watch. 
AJ: Were you like the grand marshal of Pride one year? 
JB: No, I wasn’t. I marched in yours when you were the grand marshal. 
AJ: Yes, there you go. 
JB: Just to march with other random groups. Yeah, so he’s better but he goes to school at St. Cloud 
State University, a more conservative area, he had more conservative friends than I did in high 
school and just really isn’t really into the language around social justice – especially queer, 
language around queer folks and gender identity ... he just doesn’t really know any of that, 
which most people don’t encounter that in their life. But he, in high school particularly, kind of 
had the guy friends in the high school who were kind of the perpetrators of kind of some of the 
homophobic jokes and stuff like that. He’s definitely tried though, because when I told him, 
“You can’t use these words around me at least or in our house,” he listened. His friends stopped 
saying like, “That’s so gay,” and different slurs and stuff in the house. He’s done a lot better and 
we have a much closer relationship now that I’ve come out – before I was not comfortable 
socializing with anybody and he thought I was really anti-social, and he’s a really social guy. He’s 
total Type-A personality, loves making friends with literally everybody. Before I came out I was Jae Bates 
so shy, I didn’t want to be friends with anybody, I wanted to just stay like me and maybe two 
other people and I just hated meeting people. But now that I’ve come out it’s easier for him to 
socialize with me. 
AJ: So now that you’ve come out, Jae, what have been some of the challenges that you’ve faced? 
JB: Particularly around health care, I think, is the hardest one for me. In particular, dealing with 
insurance companies and stuff like that. 
AJ: Really? 
JB: Yeah. I’m lucky enough to be on health insurance still. 
AJ: Your parents? 
JB: So originally it was through my mom’s employer and then ... my mom is now unemployed, she 
was laid off within the last couple of years and we’re now paying out of pocket. I think there 
wouldn’t be as big of a push to remain on such good health care if I wasn’t getting transitional 
health care, if I wasn’t on hormones and stuff, because the rest of my family doesn’t use a ton of 
health care – doesn’t use a ton of the insurance. I’m the main user of almost ... almost 
everything. So on top of being trans, I have other chronic conditions and so it’s been really hard 
to kind of balance my other health conditions and being trans and asking the insurance company 
for things. Every time that I renew my prior authorization for my testosterone, getting denied 
again and again and again and having my doctor have to send two letters and waiting months. 
AJ: Just for the prescription? 
JB: Yeah. 
AJ: Wow. 
JB: This happens every time we get new insurance, which has been a couple times in the last year. 
It also happens a year after the prescription has been made, so it happens multiple times in a 
year. The first time it happened was really bad. Now that I know that it can happen, I kind of 
keep enough testosterone around so that if I have to go two months without, then I can still 
survive and feel good. But yeah, I’ve been having such a hard time with ... luckily I haven’t 
gotten to the point where I have to sue them, but it’s to the point where every single time they 
give me a little bit harder ... it’s a little bit harder every time. 
AJ: Wow. 
JB: The first time that I ever filled a prescription, they were like, “Cool, yeah, great.” They didn’t 
kick it back or anything, and I was like, “Oh, this is very un-normal.” And then the next time that 
I had to renew it, they were like, “No, absolutely not, this is why, you don’t have these 
diseases.” The main reason that I couldn’t get it was like, “You don’t have HIV or AIDS.” I’m like, 
“Yes, I’m very happy that I don’t have HIV or AIDS.” 
AJ: Yes, thank goodness. Jae Bates 
JB: But I am trans so I would like my testosterone. And they were just ... it took a month for them 
to even review it. So it takes about a month and in that month if I run out it’s depression, no 
energy, because of my other chronic conditions – it really screws those up. It got so bad, I think, 
during one period where they had denied me my testosterone that I did some blood work and 
my doctor called me a couple days later, “You need to come in immediately, your blood work is 
so bad that it’s like an emergency.” This was my freshman year of college, “Well that’s 
interesting because I am in the middle of Montana on my way to college and I can’t come in so 
what should I do?” And they were like, “Ahh, do you have insulin with you, do you have all 
these things?” And I was like, “Yeah.” 
AJ: So you’re diabetic? 
JB: Yeah. And they were like, “Well, make sure that you take care of yourself because this is not 
good.” And so I was quite mad at Blue Cross Blue Shield, that’s who has my insurance. 
AJ: Absolutely. 
JB: And I had been doing so well with all my other chronic conditions and then that completely ... 
my body has been recovering from that one experience two years ago ... it’s been almost two 
years. My body has had to completely recover from just one experience of going off of 
testosterone for a month. So health care is definitely the one thing that I’ve been extremely 
passionate about talking to people about and telling other, particularly cis folks, about struggles 
in health care systems. I’ve also had bad experiences in the ER and stuff like that with nurses 
who just don’t know what’s going on – they say things or do things that aren’t appropriate. I’ve 
had to ask for different nurses before. 
AJ: Really? 
JB: Yeah. So I’ve been doing a lot of research on health care and discrimination against trans folks 
and giving talks to the Bio-Ethics Club at my college for people who want to become doctors and 
kind of say, “If you all want to be health care professionals, this is why trans health care is really 
important – even if you’re going to be an ear, nose, and throat doctor, trans folks have ... 
AJ: Ear, nose, and throats. 
JB: So you need to be competent enough to talk to trans folks. So I’ve had a lot of experience – and 
I see so many doctors and I go to so many appointments, that luckily I haven’t run into explicitly 
transphobic doctors but I’ve run into a lot of doctors who ask and say very unnecessary things 
and give you that run though. I went to see just my pediatrician to go on my trip, just saw my 
pediatrician. I should have only been in there for20 minutes but I was in there for an hour 
because he just wanted to talk about ... vaguely, like my transition and just kind of say, “Oh, it 
seems to be going so well.” And I was like, “You’re not my transitional care doctor.” 
AJ: Right, “So this is not your conversation.” 
JB: And it wasn’t even about changes to my body or my health, it was very much about my personal 
life. I was like, “You’re my pediatrician and you’re taking up minutes of my time to just try to 
say that you’re an ally but I just need to get out of here. I just wanted my shots and I need to leave.” So health care has been something ... and because I spend so much time in the health 
care system, it’s something that I need to start changing – the cost of it, the way that it works, 
everything. 
AJ: What about school? 
JB: College. 
AJ: Yeah. 
JB: College has been ... 
AJ: Some people come out after college or while they’re in college, you went to college as an out 
trans person. 
JB: Yeah. So I made the decision to not be what everyone calls stealth – I wanted to be out because 
... 
AJ: What is stealth? 
JB: Stealth is ... I don’t want to be what people call stealth, which is not telling people that you’re 
trans and saying that you ... basically just not disclosing your trans status. 
AJ: Making up a false identity that’s not really who you are. 
JB: Yeah, so I chose to be out, openly trans, because I knew that Tacoma was a safe area to do that, 
but also because on my social media and everything that I did in Minnesota, it was impossible to 
hide. But then also I wanted it to be able ... so that I could connect with other trans people on 
campus because I wanted to make friends specifically who identify as similar to me. Yeah, so I 
went to college and I had a roommate and I told him, “I’m trans, whatever.” His parents were a 
little bit weird about it but he was just this real quiet guy who only ever played video games. 
“All right, cool.” We never said a word to each other, best living situation ever. We spoke 
maybe two words to each other a day but it wasn’t in a ... 
AJ: And you think it would have been the same way whether you were trans or not. 
JB: Yeah, he was just ... really just a quiet guy. So it was probably the most ideal living situation 
that I could have had freshman year, but it was more about the way that freshman dorms are 
set up that I had a problem with. So I had really bad housing problems freshman year and 
college was very hard my freshman year because of my trans identity, but it wasn’t necessarily 
because of ... usually it’s like, “Oh you’re living with someone who is transphobic and that 
sucks.” This was very like ... he was great. 
AJ: Structural. 
JB: Very systemic problems. The bathrooms and just ... I just couldn’t do ... the way that the 
showers were set up, even though my RA tried to make it as private as possible, it was still ... 
even though I was out, I was still afraid of being outed in the bathroom, which was weird 
because it was like, “Yeah, I’m being open about being trans but I’m very afraid that when I’m in 
the bathroom someone is going to confront me about it.” So I was always very afraid to go to 
The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies 
University of Minnesota Jae Bates 
the bathroom. I ended up getting a kidney infection my freshman year because I just didn’t 
want to use freshman bathrooms. Even some of the building bathrooms, I was like, “I don’t 
know where people are at.” I heard some people say very transphobic things, particularly about 
my other trans friends and some of their partners who are trans. It was more just that I didn’t 
know the landscape. I just jumped in and was like, “Oh, it’s the Pacific Northwest, it’s fine.” And 
then kind of had to re-adjust and focus and be like, “OK, actually no – transphobia exists 
anywhere.” So I just had to re-adjust my expectations. Growing up in the Midwest, people are 
always like, “Oh Midwest is the backwards place and the Pacific Northwest is liberal and 
progressive.” 
AJ: Progressive, liberal, utopia kind of place. 
JB: Yeah, and I got there was like, “Oh no, they lied. The Midwest is not any more racist or 
transphobic or homophobic than here, it’s just different.” So I just had to re-adjust. College has 
been great but in very specific ways, and it’s been horrible in very specific ways. 
AJ: What about names and ...? 
JB: I’d already changed all my documents so I got there and it was fine. 
AJ: So ... 
JB: Yeah, the only document I don’t have changed is my birth certificate, which you rarely have to 
show people. 
AJ: So let me ask you this, Jae, and please, to the extent that you feel comfortable answering the 
question – if you don’t want to answer, don’t, have you undergone any medical interventions 
around your gender identity beyond what you’ve already discussed with this hormonal therapy. 
JB: I had a bi-lateral mastectomy when I was a senior in high school, which is actually why I ended 
up stopping track. I was a thrower when I was in track and field. 
AJ: Oh really. 
JB: I ended up getting my chest surgery during track season so it was just ... you know, you can’t 
do anything for months. 
AJ: Yeah, you can’t lift your arm over your head. 
JB: Yeah. So I got surgery when I turned because that was the policy on my insurance – you had 
to be or you had to be at least two years on testosterone, which I wasn’t. So I waited until I 
was 18, I got the surgery at the University of Minnesota, and that’s the only thing other than 
testosterone that I’ve done. They recommend that you get a hysterectomy to prevent diseases 
and cancers on the uterus and stuff like that but I’m just too nervous and afraid to go see an OB­ 
GYN so I just haven’t done anything related to ... 
AJ: Because of your trans identity? Jae Bates 
JB: Yeah, yeah. I need to research trans-friendly OB-GYNs because I’m sure they exist, I just haven’t 
had the time. It’s one of those things where you have time but you just avoid it and avoid it. It’s 
not necessarily the most fun to do even if you’re a cis gender woman. 
AJ: It’s pretty invasive. 
JB: So that’s ... I think that I will do that eventually because they recommend it for your health, and 
then also the insurance would really have no choice but to give me testosterone. 
AJ: Yeah, they would cover that and then ... 
JB: Immediately, because you have no hormones left. But yeah, that’s the extent of what I’ve had. 
AJ: OK, well thank you. What have been some of the more positive aspects of expressing your true 
gender identity? 
JB: Meeting other trans and non-binary folks. I think the friends that I’ve made in ... just the LGBT 
community in general, but specifically other trans folks, especially at college, has probably been 
one of the most positive things about my transition – other than like the personal being able to 
be a very happy, well-adjusted person and all that. I think the thing that ... 
AJ: Which is important I would suspect, I’m just going out on a limb here. 
JB: I think one of the more tangible super-positive experiences has been meeting other folks and 
just hearing about what their identity means to them. I think one of the most fulfilling things 
has been to talk to young trans folks, in particular – non-binary kids. So I did a lot of youth work 
when I was at ... I was interning at OutFront and I was working a lot with ... 
AJ: OutFront Minnesota? 
JB: OutFront Minnesota – yeah. And I was working a lot with schools and youth, so kids K-12 and 
just meeting other kids who were in the midst of the 7th grade – younger and younger than I was 
when I came out. So that’s been really cool, to just talk to them and be like ... not necessarily 
that, “Oh, it gets better,” but just, “It is OK, it’s cool.” 
AJ: Yeah, life can happen, you can be happy and work. The world doesn’t end when you come out. 
JB: Yeah, so getting resources to other trans folks and working with them and hanging out with 
them. So yeah, just befriending people and making more friends, I think, has been one of the 
most positive experiences. There’s a good group of trans and non-binary kids that I hang out at 
college. 
AJ: Is that right? Cool. Are you involved in any sort of LGBT groups or activism at college? 
JB: Yeah, I mostly do campus organizing at school. I haven’t gotten super out into state-wide stuff, 
but just locally in Tacoma. I do my school’s Queer Alliance, I’m the co-president with my best 
friend. My best friend, Rory, is the other co-president. I think almost all of our officers of the 
Queer Alliance, except for one person, are people of color. 
AJ: Nice. JB: We’re really trying to get more queer and trans folks of color to come to Queer Alliance because 
historically college queer spaces have been very white. I’m working really hard on that, in 
particular, right now. And then I also do a club called Deconstructing Masculinity for folks who 
identify as masculine to talk about the rape culture on college campuses and ending all forms of 
violence. So it’s just kind of anti-violence work. I attend other groups from time-to-time, mostly 
around immigrant injustice because my best friend comes from family with ... a lot of her 
family members are undocumented and she is Mexican American and so she does a lot of 
campus activism around immigration injustice and deportation. I just attend random other ... 
AJ: You’re an intersectional superstar. 
JB: It’s fun because it’s a small campus so when you’re involved in one group it’s like you are ... 
you’re at least connected to the other groups. 
AJ: It has a ripple effect. 
JB: Yeah, it’s easier to show up for other people and learn about other identities. We have one 
student diversity center and it houses everyone from the Jewish student groups to justice for 
undocumented folks to Queer Alliance. We’re all very interconnected and it makes it very easy 
to learn more about other people’s identities instead of having like a Queer Center and a Center 
for People of Color. 
AJ: Yeah, it’s all sort of one big happy social justice family. 
JB: Yeah, yeah. The building has to be intersectional. 
AJ: That’s awesome. So looking back over your decision to come out, would you do anything 
differently? 
JB: I would probably not do it over text so much. I think a problem ... 
AJ: With your mom, you mean? 
JB: Yeah. I mean with other people too. It’s just a generational ... it’s harder and harder to have 
in-person exchange. 
AJ: Yeah, nobody makes phone calls anymore – that’s just what happens. 
JB: I think my mom really would have liked it if I had just told her in person but it’s something that 
she had known for a while so it was just more about that direction communication. But I mean, 
coming out ... the only other thing I would have changed is doing it younger, just because I 
would have had more time, I guess, to figure ... to really be involved and figure things out, 
maybe at a little slower pace. When I came out in high school, it was still pretty early in high 
school, but it was like, “We need to figure out everything and do it before you go to college so 
that college isn’t so hard,” I guess. Or the transition to college isn’t so hard. So yeah, it was a 
little bit like rushed, like, “Here’s the thing, we have to go do this.” It all got lumped into my 
senior year and so I missed a lot of class senior year just doing court and going to the DMV and . 
. . 
AJ: And for the surgery. 
The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies 
University of Minnesota JB: Yeah, surgery and being at home. I ended up dropping my senior year math class because it was like, “I don’t need that credit and also, I can’t keep up because I’m at home.” So yeah. 
AJ: Did you go to the prom? 
JB: I went to prom my sophomore year because I was dating an older girl. I didn’t go for my junior prom and then didn’t go ... my senior prom, I was still bandaged up. 
AJ: Oh wow. 
JB: Didn’t want to jump around. 
AJ: So dating and relationships? Are you in a relationship right now? 
JB: I am in a relationship right now. I’ve been dating my girlfriend, Erin, for about a year and eight months. We met through mutual friends. She identifies as asexual and biromantic and so ... 
AJ: Asexual? 
JB: Asexual and biromantic. 
AJ: Biromantic. So explain that to me. 
JB: She identifies as asexual, which means that she doesn’t experience sexual attraction to anybody and doesn’t make sex as part of intimacy in relationships. So doesn’t have ... she just doesn’t have interest in sex. And then biromantic, so she is romantically interested in ... 
AJ: Multiple people. 
JB: Yeah, and multiple genders. 
AJ: And multiple genders. 
JB: Yeah, multiple genders. So yeah, I met her through mutual friends and knew that she at least liked men, but I also knew that she was asexual. So I asked her out on a date, it was pretty normal college date. We went for frozen yogurt for our first date. So it was pretty normal in terms of the way that it happened. And then just didn’t really talk about me being trans until ... we were figuring out if we were going to date and I was kind of like, “You already know this,” because we go to Queer Allliance together, and we kind of just talked about it – or I just ... 
AJ: You thought you should be more specific or more intentional about it. 
JB: Yeah, so I was like, “So you know I’m trans.” And she was like, “Yeah, that’s fine.” I was like, “OK.” That was really all we talked about and the big problem was that her parents are very conservative and she’s not out at home as biromantic. She didn’t think it would be a problem because I look very much like a man. So she hadn’t intended on telling her parents that I was trans. So she didn’t tell her parents immediately that we were dating and then her neighbor or something saw it on Facebook and told her parents – but not like in an angry way, just like, “Oh, Erin has a boyfriend.” So they were just interested in knowing who I was and they looked me up on Facebook or something and they saw ... my Facebook is just queer stuff. 
AJ: Right, it’s like pink and blue and ... Jae Bates 
JB: Yeah, Black Lives Matter, they’re very conservative people from the suburbs of Seattle. So it 
was like their worst nightmare because I was into racial justice, I was a Democrat ... well, not a 
Democrat, but democratic stuff, and all this queer and trans stuff. So they were not happy 
about that and it was a very big struggle for a couple of months there. Her dad would ... when 
they found out, he tried to come to campus and talk to her about it. 
AJ: Really? 
JB: Yeah, it was a big thing. Now it’s better. 
AJ: Do they know she’s asexual? Like there’s really no sex ... 
JB: She’s not out at all because she doesn’t think they would understand any of it. So it’s ... it’s 
gotten better, but it was hard for a couple months. 
AJ: Asexual seems like the kind of thing you might feel comfortable telling your parents about 
because most parents would be like, “Yay!” 
JB: But yeah, it’s been hard. Eventually it got better – like I can go over there now but her parents 
still aren’t big fans of me. 
AJ: I’m sorry. How long have you guys been hanging out? 
JB: So I’ve known her for like two years but we’ve been dating for a year and eight months. So 
yeah, her parents are getting over it. I’ve been to her house and I’ve stayed at her house and I 
went to their cabin with them – or whatever. 
AJ: So it’s getting better. 
JB: Yeah. We’ve hung out before with her parents, so it’s more just kind of her ... especially her 
mom, I guess, or whatever she told me. I think they’re getting over it and I think it’s particularly 
because I perform masculinity in a way that is more traditional or what they see as traditional. I 
wear very masculine clothes and I can talk about football, which is funny because I don’t like it 
but I had to learn perform masculine ... that’s the interesting thing, when I transitioned I had to 
learn how to perform ... I was already very masculine but then I had to learn how to over 
perform masculinity. 
AJ: But you were socialized as a young woman. 
JB: Yeah, as a girl. 
AJ: A young girl. 
JB: So I had to learn how to socialize with men, it was weird. I had to learn ... there were all these 
things that people expected me to know how to talk about so I had to Google stuff and I had to 
learn how to socialize with men, which is not always a healthy thing. So I learned how to 
healthily socialize with other men, but also not buy-in to toxic socialization. 
AJ: Sure. Jae Bates 
JB: I had to learn random things about random sports that people like to make small talk about – 
especially Minnesota, the Vikings – like how are they doing? And Seattle with the Seahawks. 
AJ: Oh my gosh, they love the Seahawks out there. 
JB: Yeah. So in order to perform masculinity in college and also to get her parents to like me more, I 
had to learn about the Seahawks and I had to be able to talk about them for a couple minutes. 
AJ: But you like sports, you were an athlete. 
JB: I like sports, but I had to over perform it. I had no interest in learning about this – I like watching 
the Super Bowl and athletics, but it was like I really need to know my stuff in order for her 
parents to kind of accept me as a man – and so kind of do traditional masculine roles. I’m 
always kind of aware when I’m with them with performing masculinity so that they can see us as 
a hetero, normative couple. So that’s how dating is with me. Before that I was just kind of 
worried about dating. I’ve always been ... like when I came out as trans initially I was very 
worried. The person that I was dating when I came out was, at the time, identified as bi-sexual 
and then just came out, after we broke up, came out as a lesbian and kind of realized that she 
doesn’t like men. She had dated two people who are now trans men before. 
AJ: Oh wow. 
JB: So I think she just realized that that was kind of a factor, she saw us both as men but just didn’t 
want to date men. I can’t speak for her but I think that’s ... 
AJ: Yeah, I mean in some ways that’s somewhat comforting. 
JB: Yeah, kind of like, “OK, well that’s validating.” 
AJ: Yeah. 
JB: But yeah, so I was always kind of worried, “Will I be able to date? Will I always only have to look 
for bi-women?” And then as I progressed through high school, I realized, “Oh, I’m not a straight 
man.” I am attracted to men and I would like to date men but I think I was always just afraid of 
dating men before I had transitioned because I hadn’t spent a lot of time around men and I was 
bullied primarily by boys in school, so I didn’t socialize with a lot of boys except for queer men, 
in particular. And I’m still really not friends with many men except for queer men. And so, yeah, 
I just grew up really afraid to socialize with men. But now that I’ve transitioned and people read 
me completely as male, it’s more comfortable for me to say, “I’m a queer man, I’m comfortable 
around other men, and I want to date men the next time that I’m in the dating pool.” 
AJ: That might be an option? 
JB: Yeah. So I identify as a queer man because I’m much more comfortable with my sexuality now 
than I was before. 
AJ: Wow, I love it. So you won an award from OutFront Minnesota. 
JB: Yeah. I can’t remember what it’s called ... The Visionary Award. Jae Bates 
AJ: The Visionary Award. Tell me about why you were selected for that award. What was the work 
that you did that sort of put you in that spotlight? 
JB: I did a lot of work on Safe Schools when that was happening and then I did a lot of work on trans 
... the Minnesota State High School League stuff. I can’t remember if that was before that or 
after that, I don’t know. But I was doing a lot of work with trans youth in particular. It was 
actually a complete surprise to me, I had just been called by Jeanne, who used to work there, 
and she told me that they had nominated me and that I’d won. I didn’t really know what was 
going on but they ... I found out when I found out that I had won that there was even a thing. 
So, I’m still feeling like what did I do, so I don’t know. I don’t like receiving awards, I really don’t. 
I’m still like, “What did I do?” I think it was mostly my work with trans youth. I was running a 
series of what we called Trans Ally Training, so just teaching community members about what 
pronouns are and different gender identities that exist – just Trans 101-kind of basics. I think it 
was mostly around that and the safe school stuff, which I testified and did a lot of lobbying and 
was at the ... not the Trans Youth Summit but the youth summit that they had in St. Paul. 
AJ: Which is a big deal for a 17, 18-year-old, to go and talk to the state senators and legislators, 
politicians. That’s a really big deal, Jae. 
JB: It was a really big honor but it was ... yeah, I still am sometimes like ... I don’t know, there are 
so many people who I feel like deserve recognition and getting awards always makes me just a 
little uncomfortable – but not because I don’t value the work or anything, it’s just mostly 
because I’m that kid who is like, “I feel like everyone should get an award for doing the work.” 
AJ: Absolutely. 
JB: I don’t like singling people out. I have complicated feelings about some of the work that I did 
sometimes because sometimes the youth work feels like you’re becoming a poster child for anti­ 
bullying work or being trans youth of color. And I know some other youth had trouble with why 
am I here, what is the work that we’re doing kind of just around being young and being in the 
work ... sometimes you feel like a show pony when you go to these events. “These are the 
youth.” “The Youth.” 
AJ: The youth – yeah. 
JB: Particularly youth of color. “Look, they’re thriving and successful.” So going to a lot of the 
conferences and fund raisers and the gala is just kind of like, “Look at this kind of shining 
person.” 
AJ: Tokenization. 
JB: Yes, being tokenized. I don’t think anyone was intentionally tokenizing me but it was just that 
feeling of like, “What am I receiving this giant glass trophy for?” I know it was from the 
community work I was doing – for trans communities, but it’s still ... I don’t like the stand-up 
recognition. 
AJ: Well, congratulations anyway. 
JB: You too. Jae Bates 
AJ: What’s next for you? What’s your vision for the next five years of your life? You’re a junior in 
college now. 
JB: Yeah, so originally I went into college and I was like, “I’m going to do psychology because I’m 
going to work with ... I want to work in the health care system and work with trans youth and 
reduce health care services for trans youth of color.” And all that stuff. But then I got to college 
and I was like, “Oh yeah, I hate science and I’m really bad at it, so I can’t do psychology. I can’t 
be a doctor.” Which I didn’t want to be a doctor but I had thought psychology would be OK. But 
that just doesn’t work with the way that I learn. So I found the Study of Religious Studies and I 
found ... I’m an African American Studies, Gender Studies and Chinese Language and Culture, 
which sounds like a lot. People are always like, “That’s insane.” But they’re all very ... they 
intersect very well, so most of those departments you can take classes and it double counts. It’s 
not as bad as people think it sounds. So I’m very into the humanities and I’m very into ... so I 
thought maybe I could apply for pre-law or something and then work in trans law. I really 
wanted to do something that was intentional so I could continue to work in queer and trans 
communities, but then I got selected to work in residence life and I started to work in student 
affairs at my college and at student centers and work with other students and realized that I 
really liked that work – working with young people but in a way that’s kind of just more on an 
equal level instead of, “I’m this lawyer and I’m top down, I’m going to help you with this 
service.” But more just kind of talking and working together and so I think that I’d really like to 
go into student affairs like at a college when I’m done, and work with students from 
marginalized backgrounds and minoritized students on college campuses because the people 
that I’ve met who do those jobs have completely changed my experience in college and have 
made it bearable and wonderful and positive. 
AJ: Nice. 
JB: We do great things, so I would love to do that and especially because we’ll be ... this is the first 
year, but I started the Trans Non-Binary Housing Program at my college. 
AJ: Really? 
JB: Yeah, so that’s what I’m an RA for, residence assistance, to run that program – or not run it, run 
it, but to do that program. I really think that after college I’d love to ... 
AJ: And it’s called the Queer ... 
JB: It’s called the Trans and Non-Binary Housing at the University of Puget Sound. So I figured out – 
you know, I really like working in the Student Diversity Center and I really like working with 
residents and helping them figure out there are resources on this college campus for you even 
though this college campus wasn’t built with you in mind. So, doing that kind of work is what I 
think I want to do. 
AJ: And you think after college you’ll pursue the academy and work within the institution? 
JB: Yeah, it will depend on if I can afford it. So I’m currently receiving enough scholarships to cover 
my undergrad for full ride except for about $4000 that I pay. AJ: Nice, that’s pretty amazing. 
JB: Yeah, I receive a lot of grants and scholarships through religious and spiritual life. We have a lot 
of scholarships for students from marginalized backgrounds so I apply for so many of those that 
I’m able to afford undergrad. So going on to see if I can get a graduate degree to do student 
affairs will depend on if I find one of those employment programs that helps you pay for it or if I 
can get a good enough job out of college to be able to pursue that. But I would like to get ... 
because there is a degree program for student affairs that you can do these jobs, so hopefully I’ll 
be able to do that. And actually the office that I work for at my college is going to hopefully 
soon be offering a post-graduate program so after you get your BA and before you figure out 
what you’re doing with the rest of your life, they have a paid position for someone to work in 
student affairs and to learn about what that’s about. 
AJ: I’m going to predict you get that job. 
JB: I’m hoping that I’m able to do that job. But that’s what I’d like to do in the next five years. 
AJ: Where do you see the transgender community in the next years? There’s been so much 
visibility, so much progress even though we’re witnessing a lot of backlash from the H2 Bill in 
North Carolina to the murders that happened in Orlando recently. But what do you see ... or 
where do you see the transgender community headed in the next years? 
JB: Fifty years is a long time. I feel like a lot of stuff has rapidly ... or not rapidly, but comparatively 
to other things, kind of rapidly come into the mainstream as an issue at least. Liberation isn’t 
happening at necessarily the same pace as visibility is happening. 
AJ: I love that. 
JB: Which I think is the real program I’m having – a lot of folks can read Janet Mock’s book and ... 
AJ: Watch Orange is the New Black. 
JB: And watch Orange is the New Black and love LaVerne Cox and have the Vanity Fair cover of 
Caitlyn Jenner or whatever they think is ally ship but it’s not really ... they can say . .. wear 
buttons that say, ‘I’ll Go With You’ and they can think that going to the bathroom with their 
trans friends will help. And they can shop at Target all they want to support, but it’s just 
visibility happens so much faster than any of the liberation work. So now it’s like ... I think 
especially cis folks are under the impression that liberation has happened with visibility and that 
rights are coming faster than before or something. I’m hearing a lot of people talk about it and 
name drop all these great people and this terminology, but I’m not seeing any change in terms 
of insurance companies and discrimination and firing practices and hiring practices and every 
day safety. In years I would hope that the systemic violence – like violence in the health care 
system and discrimination is, at least, closer to the average amount of whatever people already 
experience of non-trans folks. And I would hope that a lot of the individuals, like the personal 
violence, has been reduced. But I think in years we’ll be probably in the same place with 
assimilation that I think queer folks are at. I already see it happening right now, which is the be 
just like all the other cis people and just kind of molding us into ... you know, the military letting 
trans folks be out in the military, so not talking about what’s wrong with the military and what’s 
The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies 
University of Minnesota wrong with the state and violence against trans folks. But, “You can be part of us now, you can do this now.” I kind of see it moving ... that’s like with a lot of social things, just move the marginalized folks into here and then that will make it better, instead of figuring out what our differences are and how those can still be beautiful if you just don’t commit violence. 
AJ: So assimilation. 
JB: Assimilation, yeah. I see it kind of moving towards there – like here’s what it is and just kind of a treat being trans so that you can pass as cis is kind of where I’m worried it will move towards, just kind of ... health care might get easier but not really to benefit us, really. We can make sure that trans folks are all transitioning and that kind of stuff. So still no room for gender queerness and non-binary. I would hope that there is room for that but I’m just kind of guessing – at least the mainstream is very ... like trans women, trans me – great, sounds good, move them in with the rest of the folks so that they can do their jobs and go to work 9-5, do that thing. 
AJ: All those other weirdos stay over there. 
JB: Yeah. So I’m kind of worried it’s moved in the same direction, focusing on these very particular things that cis folks think are very important – kind of the way that queer liberation people thought stopped at marriage when it doesn’t. 
AJ: Right. 
JB: Yeah, I’m just kind of worried that what is important is going to get lost along the way. But overall I think it’s going to be safe, like a lot safer to be trans – hopefully. 
AJ: Yeah. There’s no right answer, we’re just visiting your future. 
JB: Fifty years is a long time. But yeah, that’s kind of what I think. Assimilation is what we’re moving ... what a lot of people are moving towards. 
AJ: Wow. Well I can’t thank you enough, Jae, for this conversation. 
JB: Yeah, thank you so much. 
AJ: You are my new hero right now. I know you’re headed off to South Korea. 
JB: Yeah. 
AJ: I just want to wish you safe travels and good luck on this journey in your life. 
JB: Thank you, I’m excited. Thanks. 
AJ: Peace. 
JB: Thanks. 
