Micky Bradford 
Narrator 
Andrea Jenkins 
Interviewer 
Micky Bradford Interview 
Andrea Jenkins -AJ 
Micky Bradford -MB AJ: So hello. 
MB: Hey Andrea, how are you? AJ: I’m doing good. My name is Andrea Jenkins, and I am the oral historian for The Transgender Oral 
History Project at the Tretter Collection at the University of Minnesota, uhm, Libraries. And 
today is September… MB: October. AJ: Oh, my goodness. It is not September. 
MB: [Laughs]. AJ: Today is October 4th . MB: Yes. AJ: [Laughs]. 2017. Wow, time is really flying. MB: Yeah. 
AJ: Uhm, I am in New York City. MB: Mhm. AJ: Uh, and more specifically we are Uptown in Harlem, and I am here today with Micky Bradford. MB: Hey. [Snaps fingers]. AJ: Micky, how are you doing? 
MB: I’m good, I’m good. I’m doing great. It’s great to be here. AJ: Yeah, thank you so much for participating. Uh, so I’m gonna ask you to state your name, spell 
your name, just so we make sure we have it all spelled correctly, uhm, tell me your gender 
identity as you define it today, as you proclaim it today. And your gender assigned at birth. And 
pronouns that you use. MB: Okay. My name is Micky Bradford. It’s spelled M.I.C.K.Y. B.R.A.D.F.O.R.D. uhm, actually I have a 
funny story about that I’ll tell you about later about naming myself. 
AJ: Okay. I’m gonna ask you about that so yes. The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies 
University of Minnesota Micky Bradford Interview 
MB: Uhm, I use she/her, they/them pronouns. I identify as non-binary, trans feminine, uhm, was 
assigned male at birth and was like that’s not me. AJ: Right. 
MB: Uhm, and yeah, I navigate this world as a feminine person. AJ: You live in the world as a feminine person? MB: Yeah. AJ: Yeah. Wow. Well, thank you Micky. Uhm, you know, I wanna name that we are here together as 
a part of the Sojourner Truth Leadership Circle... MB: Yes. AJ: … which is a project of the, uhm, Auburn Seminary. MB: Mhm. 
AJ: And it’s specifically for black trans women. We have been at it for nine months now. We started 
in February. What a ride, huh? MB: Wow, it’s been a while. 
AJ: Yes. And, uhm, yourself and eight other cohorts… MB: Mhm. AJ: … uh, have been through self-care leadership, uh, retreat. So I’m gonna ask you to speak on that 
a little bit and reflect on how have these past nine months been for you, uhm, has it been, in 
any way, transformative or what are some of the transformative moments that you recognize 
and appreciate and whatever else you would like to say about the, the, I think historic, uhm, 
opportunity to come together as black trans women. 
MB: Mhm. AJ: Uhm, cause one of the things that attracted me to this work is that, you know, and nothing 
against my POC sisters or white sisters but this is all black trans space so what are you’re 
thoughts Micky? MB: Yeah, well I’m glad you said it that way. It’s a special thing when black folks come together. AJ: Mhm. 
MB: Especially black trans girls. The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies 
University of Minnesota Micky Bradford Interview 
AJ: Right. MB: Uhm, I definitely did not have a whole lot of black trans magic… AJ: Mhm. MB: ... uhm, growing up, even just being back, uhm, in Atlanta, uhm, until I came in to organizing… AJ: Right. 
MB: … uhm, I just didn’t have that so I’m just super grateful for this experience… AJ: Mhm. MB: … and being a part of the cohort. The girls are amazing. Everyone is brilliant… AJ: [Laughs]. MB: … and beautiful and powerful. 
AJ: Right. MB: Uhm, and they make me feel all of those things as well. AJ: Well, you are all of those things. [Laughs]. MB: Thank you. [Laughs]. AJ: Especially the beautiful and brilliant part. 
MB: Oh, stop! AJ: Uhm, but, uhm, yeah, I mean, we, we spent two retreats sessions in Madison, Georgia… MB: Mhm. AJ: … in the Deep South. And you’re actually from the south, and we’ll talk about that in a little bit 
but, uhm, just how, how is it morphed for you over time from our first time together until now? MB: Oh wow. AJ: And graduation was last night. MB: Right. Micky Bradford Interview 
AJ: And there was a big celebration, and I had a conversation with Melissa Harris-Perry which was 
very fascinating. Uh, [laughs], but how, how has things, you know, from the first day you 
showed up until now? MB: I think I have definitely improved some of my self-care practices. AJ: Mhm. MB: I, and by improved I mean there are actually self-care practices now. [Laughs]. 
AJ: Okay. Right. MB: … where there weren’t. AJ: Where there weren’t, yes. [Laughs]. Same here. MB: Okay. You know, uhm, we’re not often equipped with those and we’re not often given access to 
spaces to even like explore… AJ: Right. MB: … what those options look like in a group setting. Yeah, figure out what works, what doesn’t 
work. AJ: Right. MB: Uhm, so I’ve started more meditation and censoring and, uhm, I’ve just really tried to figure out 
what are the things that I need. I started therapy this year… AJ: Wow. MB: … with a black woman. AJ: Uhuh. 
MB: Uhm, yeah, there have been a number of changes so I’m super happy about being able to be 
slowly transformed into [laughs] a woman. AJ: Cause it’s a process, right? 
MB: Yeah. AJ: It is a process, I mean, these things don’t happen overnight, you know? MB: Right. The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies 
University of Minnesota Micky Bradford Interview 
AJ: There are lifestyle changes and, uhm, and, and the whole point of the leadership self-care work 
is to be able to do our work more effectively and more holistically… MB: Mh. 
AJ: … uhm, I think, anyway, and so, uhm… MB: Absolutely. AJ: You know, I’m just thrilled to be a part of it to say that at least now I know that there are eight 
more healthier women… MB: [Laughs]. AJ: … you know, I won’t say healthy but healthier, uhm, trans women out here lifting up trans 
voices, uhm, doing all of the amazing work that people are doing in their different lanes. Uhm, 
and, and what’s your work? MB: My work, uh, is varied. I’m a cultural organizer… 
AJ: Mhm. MB: …. So I try to bring together both the arts and like how do we actually take our power back as a 
people, as a community. 
AJ: Right. Right. MB: Uhm… AJ: I’m, I’m, you mentioned the arts and I’m just feeling this whole Grace Jones Strange vib… MB: [Laughs]. Yeah. AJ: … what you’re featuring. Thank you. 
MB: Thank you. AJ: Yes. [Laughs]. MB: Grace Jones is a huge inspiration for me. AJ: Is that right? MB: Oh god, yes. I have every single movie she’s ever been in. I’ve seen every single movie she’s ever 
been in. AJ: Okay. Alright. 
The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies 
University of Minnesota Micky Bradford Interview MB: I have her autobiography. AJ: So you caught the Strange reference then. 
MB: Oh, yes. AJ: Yes. MB: I know me some Strange. AJ: Yes. [Laughs]. MB: We can talk more about that too. 
AJ: Okay. MB: But yeah, I’m, uhm… AJ: But Grace was sort of this iconic androgynous sex positive… MB: Yes. AJ: Uhm, all up in her blackness. 
MB: Unapologetically black. AJ: Unapologetically black. Uhm… MB: Her and Nina Simone are like dark skinned black women goals for me, like just unapologetic and 
beautiful and, uh… AJ: But I think the most fascinating thing to me was her play with gender. MB: Hm. And sexuality. AJ: And sexuality. MB: She would bring like these little white boys like up on stage. 
AJ: Uhuh. MB: And like basically like top them in front of the fucking audience. AJ: Right. Exactly. The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies 
University of Minnesota Micky Bradford Interview 
MB: And people got into it. I was like, ooo. You can be a masculine woman. Oh, okay, alright. You can 
be masculine and feminine. AJ: Mhm. 
MB: Oh my. AJ: Yeah. She made space for all of that. MB: She paved the way for that for sure. AJ: Yeah. Where are you from? MB: Uh, so that’s a hard question to answer. 
AJ: Okay. MB: I was born in Nuremberg, Germany on a military base. AJ: Nuremberg, okay. MB: My dad was in the army at the time. AJ: Uhuh. 
MB: Uh, but both of my parents are from Albany, Georgia. AJ: Okay. MB: So Southwest Georgia. AJ: Uhuh. [Laughs]. MB: Mhm. And I spent every summer there. 
AJ: Really? Did you have any… you were born in Nuremberg. Did you have any of your… growing up 
there or? MB: We left pretty early after I was born, maybe about two, three years so I don’t remember any of 
it. AJ: Yeah. MB: Uhm, we went from there to South Korea. And I remember Christmas in Korea. 
AJ: Oh wow. Okay. The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies 
University of Minnesota Micky Bradford Interview 
MB: There was no Santa Claus. There were no angels. AJ: No trees. MB: No trees, well… there were some trees. It was just presents. It was mostly just presents. AJ: Okay. MB: Like the entire Christian thing was removed and it was just a Capitalist kind of gift giving thing. 
AJ: Right. Exactly. MB: And I was like hey, that’s cool by me. AJ: That’s cool, right. You’re like a baby basically right? MB: Right. AJ: [Laughs]. 
MB: I think we left when I was maybe about like nine, I think… AJ: Uhuh. MB: … in Korea. AJ: In South Korea? Wow, okay, so you went to school there for a while. MB: Yeah, for a little bit. 
AJ: Uhuh. On base or in… MB: On base. AJ: On base. MB: Always. I’ve lived on military bases almost my entire life. AJ: Okay. 
MB: Until I would move to Georgia, uhm, and then we moved to another military base, North 
Carolina Fayetteville. AJ: Mhm. 
MB: Another military base Fort Knox, Kentucky, past the goal vault every morning on my way to 
school. 
The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies 
University of Minnesota Micky Bradford Interview AJ: Oh wow. MB: Mhm. 
AJ: [Laughs]. MB: And then we moved, uh, back to Atlanta, and that’s where I’ve been for the last… AJ: So your father must have been like an officer or something. I mean, clearly career, military. MB: Yes. AJ: Was he ranked or? 
MB: Oh, josh, you gonna have me lie. I don’t know what that man’s rank was. Military was never very 
interested in me. AJ: Okay. 
MB: All I know is that he trained in the National Guard. AJ: Uhuh. MB: Uhm, and he was some kind of, oh god, I wanna say I know the name. I know lieutenant was in 
the title. That’s what I know. AJ: Right. Okay. MB: I hope he’s not going to watch this and be like, “You don’t know my fucking title?” [Laughs]. AJ: Oh wow. Uhm, so growing up, what was it like? Were you… well, let me ask you this question. 
When did you first recognize your gender was not like… MB: Other kids. AJ: … other kids. MB: Uhm, I wanna say it was… 
AJ: And I should say other kids assigned male at birth. MB: Yeah. AJ: Yeah. MB: I wanna say it was probably really early on like… Micky Bradford Interview 
1 AJ: MB: Really? … Kindergarten, first grade, uhm, I remember always being singled out for being more feminine. 
6 AJ: MB: Mhm. Uhm, but other kids of, uhm, girls, boys, adults, uhm, would comment on my femininity to my parents. 
11 AJ: MB: AJ: MB: AJ: Really? Mhm. Did you have problems in schools and in the neighborhoods and all of that kind of stuff? No, no one like tried to beat me up or anything. Okay. That’s good. 
21 MB: AJ: MB: AJ: MB: That was, yeah, uhm, but it did kind of make me a little distant from folks. Right. Mhm. And remember we’re like moving around like every couple of years. [Snaps fingers]. Right. Keep making new friends. 
31 AJ: MB: AJ: MB: AJ: Mhm. Uhm, but that was a constant theme everywhere I went. Uh, what about siblings. Did you have siblings? Yeah! Oh my god, we have a big family. So I have an older half-brother… Uhuh. 
41 MB: AJ: … who I grew up with until I was about ten. He moved out. Uhm, he’s about ten years older than me. Okay. 
46 MB: Uhm, and I’m twenty-six. Micky Bradford Interview 
AJ: Right, okay. MB: So he’s thirty-six. Uhm, I have an older half-sister. Same dad. Different mom. AJ: Mhm. MB: Uhm, she’s married, lives in Georgia. Another older half-sister. Same dad. Different mom. AJ: Okay. 
MB: From… AJ: Different mom from the other half-sister with the different mom. MB: And different mom from my older brother. AJ: Oh wow. Okay. MB: And then there’s my little sister. 
AJ: Oh, it’s kind of a rolling stone, huh? [Laughs]. MB: You caught that? AJ: [Laughs]. MB: He got around. AJ: Yeah. 
MB: My dad’s pretty cute. I don’t know. AJ: Okay. MB: We’ve got good looks in our family. AJ: Right. Right. MB: [Laughs]. 
AJ: [Laughs]. MB: I think he took advantage of that. AJ: Yeah, no shame, no shame. Uhm… 
Micky Bradford Interview 
MB: But that’s my family. My parents have been married, uhm, gosh, how long has it been now? 
Twenty-three years, I think? AJ: Mh. 
MB: Twenty-three. Something like that. AJ: So were your siblings… mean, accepting, like were they protective of you or were they just 
grown and gone? [Laughs]. 
MB: Here’s the thing about southern folks. They’re never, well, I shouldn’t say never right? Rarely 
have I experienced folks being, uhm, sort of just mean, right? AJ: Mhm. 
MB: It’s always kind of more like a, a pulling back. AJ: Hm. MB: It’s more of a, uh, we just won’t talk about that. Very Don’t Ask, Don’t Tell type of policy. AJ: Mhm, mhm. Yeah. MB: Uhm, and sometimes that can be even more hurtful. 
AJ: That can be painful. Yeah. Absolutely. MB: I would love a clash. Let’s clash. Let’s talk it out. AJ: Right? And then just get it over with, right? [Laughs]. MB: Done. Have the drama be done. AJ: Yeah. 
MB: But, no, they’re not people who do that but I am, uhm, out to all of my family as trans. AJ: Really? MB: Yeah. AJ: How does that, how does that go over? MB: Ha! Oh my gosh, so, uhm, quick story, so I was hanging out with my parents in New Orleans… 
AJ: Mhm. The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies 
University of Minnesota Micky Bradford Interview 
MB: They just happened to be visiting for Essence Festival. I was there for work. AJ: Right. MB: We were there with some family friends. We were hanging out or whatever. It was all going 
great. AJ: Mhm. MB: And later my mom was like, “Yeah, you know, we want to spend Thanksgiving with them too 
and want to go to a cabin.” And I was like, “Oh, cool, well, you know, I don’t want to go to a 
cabin and be stuck in that space with folks who are gonna be calling me he/him/him… AJ: Right. Uhuh. 
MB: … all the time. Uhm, and so I was like, “You know, if you— I think y’all should have a 
conversation with them or I can have a conversation with them, but I think we should talk about 
it cause I’m not gonna… I just don’t do that.” AJ: Right. Uhuh. MB: And my mom was just, she sat with it for a little bit… AJ: Yeah. 
MB: She got quiet. And then she said, and I will never forget, “Well, I just don’t want Thanksgiving to 
be a downer.” AJ: Uhuh. 
MB: And I said, “Oh, okay. My gender makes Thanksgiving a downer.” AJ: Oh boy. MB: So I was just like, “Okay, that’s…” So my family is trying but… AJ: So this is, this upcoming, this upcoming… MB: This upcoming. 
AJ: … Thanksgiving. This was not a Thanksgiving past. MB: No. This, this upcoming Thanksgiving… AJ: Hm. 
Micky Bradford Interview 
MB: … which I will not be spending with them because I’m not gonna have somebody call out my 
name. AJ: No, yeah. Absolutely. 
MB: I worked hard. AJ: Uhm, wow. MB: Besides that, though, my family is pretty good around trying to work and understand… AJ: Mhm. MB: … uhm, my gender transition. 
AJ: Sure. MB: They’ve come to drag shows back when I was [laughs], you know, tearing up the stage. [Laughs]. 
My dad would have a camera and be like, “That’s my son, my daughter, I mean, uh, you go girl.” 
AJ: I mean, uhm, [Laughs]. MB: His little camcorder. I used to steal my mom’s clothes and go and go and perform. Her little 
wigs, her little afro wigs, it was everything. 
AJ: Cause I think you mentioned to me that you’re, you’re gonna go back home for a little bit. MB: Yeah. AJ: Mhm. MB: Yeah. AJ: So… 
MB: It should be interesting. AJ: Yeah. MB: They call me she and her now so that’s a good change. AJ: Yeah. So it’s gonna work out. MB: I think it will work out for the time being. I don’t try to stay there more than I need to. 
AJ: Right. Exactly. 
Micky Bradford Interview 
MB: But they’ve had an evolution, and my parents have, uhm, really tried to, I think, increase their 
knowledge of LGBTQ folks… AJ: Wow. 
MB: … since I’ve come out multiple times to them. [Laughs]. AJ: Okay. [Laughs]. MB: Gender, sexuality, all of that. AJ: How many times have you come out? MB: Oh god, uhm… 
AJ: And as what? MB: [Laughs]. Uhm, first I came out as bisexual. AJ: Mhm. MB: Then I came out as gay. AJ: Mhm. 
MB: And then I came out as queer. AJ: Yeah. MB: And then I came out as non-binary. AJ: Wow. MB: Then I came out as a woman. And then came out as a queer trans woman, uhm… 
AJ: Wow. MB: Yeah, and that’s where we are right now… AJ: [Laughs]. MB: … six coming outs. [Laughs]. AJ: [Laughs]. Trans woman, then queer trans woman right? 
MB: Yeah. And I don’t think… I haven’t come out to my parents as a queer trans woman yet. The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies 
University of Minnesota Micky Bradford Interview 
AJ: Okay. MB: They’ve met— uhm, uh, this girl that I dated but they didn’t know that we were dating. AJ: Okay. So what does queer trans woman mean to you? MB: It just means that my sexuality isn’t limited to whatever somebody’s body is like… [Laughs]. My 
sexuality is like if you are a top we got, we have business. AJ: We good, we good. MB: Okay, we good. I don’t care what the gender is. AJ: So are you dating a cis woman now or the woman, I don’t know if I should use that frame. 
MB: No. No, she identifies as a cis or I would say she more GNC but anyway, no we’re not dating 
anymore. AJ: Okay. 
MB: I’m single as a pringle. AJ: Alrighty. [Laughs]. Very good. Uh, wow, that is a lot of coming out. MB: Yeah. [Laughs]. The spectrum of gender and sexuality. AJ: I’ve come out multiple, multiple times to my family so I can relate. MB: [Laughs]. 
AJ: Uhm, so you went to high school in Albany then? MB: No, I went to high school in Lawrenceville which is about an hour in the suburbs outside of 
Atlanta. 
AJ: Okay. MB: And that’s been my last two, three years there. AJ: Yeah. MB: Transferred in, had to make friends and all of that. It was cute. AJ: What about college? 
MB: College I went to Georgia State University. 
Micky Bradford Interview 
AJ: Alright. MB: And that when I started organizing in Atlanta. AJ: Okay. And that’s when you started organizing. So talk, talk to me a little bit about this arts 
organizing that you do. MB: I am the cofounder and organizer of Southern Fried Queer Pride Festival. AJ: Uhuh. MB: I’m super excited because we started… AJ: Southern Fried Queer Pride Festival? 
MB: Yes. AJ: Okay. [Laughs]. MB: Yes. You gotta have your southern pride. AJ: When is the happening? MB: It’s, uhm, it changes. It’s usually around Stonewall every year. 
AJ: Okay. MB: For the last three years. AJ: So Pride-ish kind of time of the year? MB: Yeah. But we try to really center art and culture. AJ: Right. 
MB: Uhm, and try to actually like move a more radical politic cause we need to see that happenin’. AJ: Right. Right. Uhm, so it’s, it’s music, it’s dance, it’s performance, and visual art. MB: Mhm. Art galleries. We do, uh, gallery submission. AJ: Mhm. MB: Uhm, there’s puppetry [laughs], comedians, uh, variety show, workshops. 
AJ: Is it a multiple day event? The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies 
University of Minnesota Micky Bradford Interview 
MB: Oh yeah. AJ: Mhm. MB: It’s a weeklong thing. AJ: Oh, it’s a week long. MB: It’s a weeklong thing. It takes a lot of energy, a lot of people. 
AJ: Right. Wow. Yeah. That is organizing. MB: [Laughs]. AJ: Uhm, what’s the importance for organizing around art in your opinion? MB: It’s necessary. I, I don’t think that we can have actual movements without art. I don’t think that 
we can have conversations, uhm, about actually how these issues affect us. AJ: Mhm. MB: Like, in our bodies, in our hearts, in our families, in our emotions, in our spirits. Like we can’t 
have those conversations… AJ: Right. MB: … as deeply without art as a medium to actually bare the soul and actually be vulnerable. AJ: Mhm. Wow, that’s beautiful. Uhm… 
MB: Otherwise everything is so surface level and theory and nah. AJ: And so what’s your artistic expression? MB: I’m a performance artist. AJ: Yeah. [Laughs]. MB: I did this one performance, uhm, it was in like drag, uhm, where I had this film playing on the 
screen in the back of me… AJ: Mhm, mhm. MB: … while I’m dancin’. 
AJ: Right. 
Micky Bradford Interview 
MB: Sade’s Is it a Crime is playing. AJ: [Singing] Is it a crime? MB: Yes, exactly. And it’s a whole piece around, uhm, the fetishization and criminalization of black 
queer folks, black trans folks. AJ: Right. MB: Uhm, and so I have white people come up and lick chocolate off of me. AJ: Oh. Oh, interesting. MB: Yes. And at a certain point in the performance they realize, “Oh, this is bad. I’m not supposed, 
this is racist. Oh, my god, I’m participating in racism.” And I’m just living it up, of course. AJ: Right. MB: And then the black people are getting like, “Oh, my god I love this.” [Laughs]. You’re 
embarrassing all of them. AJ: Wow. Exactly. MB: So that’s my work. 
AJ: You’re a little sticky but it was worth it I would take it. MB: Oh absolutely. I love to be naked. AJ: [Laughs]. MB: And fucking have things all over my body, oh my god yes. AJ: Wow. That’s incredible. 
MB: [Laughs]. AJ: Uhm… MB: Thank you. AJ: So, uhm, what kind of challenges have you personally faced since you’ve come out as a trans…? MB: Oh, god. 
AJ: … a queer trans woman? 
Micky Bradford Interview 
MB: Right. You know, [laughs], it ain’t easy being a trans woman out here, you know? AJ: Mhm. MB: Uhm… AJ: I mean you talked about you’re probably gonna have to miss Thanksgiving this year. MB: Mmm. 
AJ: That’s, that’s a challenge even though you understand and respect and, you know, I’m sure 
mom is gonna cook you a turkey before they go to camp or [laughs] after they get back or 
something but… MB: Hopefully I get something. AJ: Yeah. MB: A little tofu loaf, I don’t know. 
AJ: [Laughs]. MB: Uhm, I don’t know, [sighs], I think it’s just extremely isolating. AJ: Mmm. MB: That’s just what I have to say… AJ: Yeah. 
MB: … in terms of challenges. It’s just the, the anxiety, the depression, all of it, uhm, I think has been 
real isolating, and it makes it hard to, to speak sometimes. It makes it hard to believe in your 
voice and the power of your voice and the validity of, of your voice, uhm, of my voice. AJ: Right. MB: Yeah. I think it’s been hard to, to love myself. To actually be like, “Oh, this body is fine. This body 
is lovely.” AJ: Are you getting closer to that? MB: Absolutely. Everyday. [Laughs]. I mean, honestly, I used to be that kid that was just like super, 
super angry all the time… AJ: Right. 
Micky Bradford Interview 
MB: Uhm, did not know what to do with that shit. I was slamming doors, oh my god, I don’t know 
how my parents live with me. AJ: Yes. [Laughs]. 
MB: Uhm, and I don’t have… AJ: And now you’re like the most joyful person ever. MB: [Laughs]. I’m not the most joyful person ever. AJ: Maybe not the most joyful person ever but I’ve experienced you as joyful in our interactions 
together. Thoughtful and, uhm, certainly sort of like appropriately in whatever the situation is, 
whether it’s a deep serious conversation or just with the children, I mean, but there’s always a 
joyfulness, and maybe, maybe it’s your youthfulness that, uh… MB: [Laughs]. AJ: … that sort of facilitates some of that but, uhm… 
MB: [Laughs]. Fifty, fifty. AJ: … it’s a beautiful thing to be around you and, and it comes off on other people… MB: Cute. AJ: … or at least me anyways. Yeah, so, uhm… MB: That’s my work though is to bring joy… 
AJ: Mhm. MB: … is just to always try to see things better than they are. I mean that’s the social justice work. 
That shit is depressing and thankless. 
AJ: It’s hard. It’s very hard work. It’s thankless as, as fuck. MB: [Laughs]. AJ: It’s thankless as fuck. Like, nobody sees you, uh, ever. MB: And we are not getting paid. AJ: Unless you are superbly, beautifully, uh, [laughs], trans. 
MB: Mm. 
Micky Bradford Interview 
AJ: [Laughs]. And, you know, and not to say that we aren’t beautiful but we, I don’t meet the sort of 
standards of beauty that others have deemed acceptable. MB: Or as like to be lifted up as an example of black transness. 
AJ: Right. Exactly. And so consequently, uhm, that’s a thing. But speaking of joy what are the joys 
that you’ve experienced since coming out as QTW. MB: QTW. Queer trans woman. [Laughs]. I’m gonna take that down. Put that on my HER account. 
[Laughs]. AJ: Right. MB: [Laughs]. 
AJ: Which account? MB: HER. The lesbian dating app. AJ: Oh, okay. MB: It’s where to find lesbians. [Laughs]. I’ll put that in there. Uhm, shit, the joy, the fucking joy is 
being in this damn community. AJ: Mhm. MB: Like I have never not been grateful for the fucking people that I have met in these years, uhm… AJ: Wow. 
MB: I wish, sorry [Tearing up]. AJ: It’s okay. MB: Uhm, yeah, people have really showed up for me… AJ: Yeah? MB: … across the years, people have really fucking showed up for me from the time when I... Before I 
even knew… AJ: Uhuh. MB: … about my gender or my sexuality or was even kinda going through… 
AJ: Right. 
Micky Bradford Interview 
MB: … exploring those, uhm… AJ: Mhm. MB: I mean, my fucking [laughs] non-black tiq uando instructors were like some of the first people 
to… AJ: Really. MB: … actually just be like, “You’re okay, you little weirdo.” AJ: Awe. [Laughs]. MB: “We gonna take you to Dragoncon and we’re gonna talk to you about some gay shit.” 
AJ: [Laughs]. Wow. MB: “Even though you haven’t told us, but we’re gonna talk to you about this cause we know you 
wanna talk about gay shit.” 
AJ: Right. MB: They were so fucking cool. AJ: Ah. MB: And from like, that was me, god, fifteen, sixteen… AJ: Mhm, mhm. 
MB: … I was taking tiquando. AJ: Right. MB: Uhm, up until, I’m twenty-six now, and folks are still showing up for me just in the most amazing 
ways. AJ: Wow. MB: And just, yeah. So I’m super grateful to my community… AJ: Mhm. MB: … all the time. 
AJ: Yeah. Have you, uhm, and, you know, please answer this question to the extent that you feel 
comfortable. Micky Bradford Interview MB: Okay. AJ: If you don’t feel comfortable at all you don’t have to answer it whatsoever but have you 
pursued or do you think you plan to pursue any medical, uhm, interventions as a part of your 
gender journey. MB: Uhm, it’s been a thought for sure. AJ: Mhm. MB: Uhm, I think that there aren’t a whole lot of… I don’t know, just ways to be in the world as a 
femme male assigned at birth person. AJ: Mhm. MB: Uhm, and survive this world without some type of transitioning, I just, for me, right, that’s, 
that’s my narrative… AJ: Mhm, mhm. MB: … I just don’t think I can survive in this world not transitioning. AJ: Wow. Mhm. 
MB: And one day be able to somewhat pass. [Laughs]. AJ: I don’t think that’s your problem but… [Laughs]. MB: Yeah, no I’m, yeah. It’s, it’s definitely in the near future for me as well. AJ: Hormones or... MB: Absolutely. I love hormones. 
AJ: Okay. MB: I love hormones. AJ: But you’re on hormones then? MB: Yes. AJ: Okay. Alright. Cool. And they’re giving you the desired effects? [Laughs]. 
MB: Yeah, yeah, yeah, they’re coming through. The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies 
University of Minnesota Micky Bradford Interview 
AJ: Yeah, it’s coming through this moment. [Laughs]. MB: [Laughs]. She’s doing what she’s supposed to. AJ: Do what you do, baby girl. [Laughs]. MB: Yeah. But I am, yeah, I’m weighing my options around surgery and things like that. AJ: Uhuh. 
MB: I don’t think right now that I want FFS, facial feminization surgery. AJ: Right. MB: Uhm, I just wanna, I remember there was a… I can’t remember when but it was an interview 
that Amiyah Scott gave… AJ: Uhuh. MB: … where she said, uhm… AJ: Amiyah. MB: Amiyah. 
AJ: Uhuh. MB: … where she said give your body five years. Like just five years on hormones. AJ: Mhm. MB: If you can do that and you can actually see yourself like… AJ: Sure. 
MB: … in your actual body as it is. AJ: Uhuh. MB: Uhm, then you can start to make more decisions about what surgical options and other things. AJ: Mhm. MB: And I was like that feels right for me. I just wanna be at home in my body. 
AJ: Right. 
Micky Bradford Interview 
MB: Uhm, and I want to see what this body is capable of. AJ: Mhm. MB: You know, with a different balance of hormones. AJ: That’s, that’s, that’s a good, uhm, good advice. I mean, you know, it’s one way of thinking about 
it. MB: Yeah. AJ: I’m sure other people have other ideas but, uhm, no, uhm, so I’m just gonna switch gears a little 
bit cause you talked about… MB: Switch it up. AJ: … Southern Fried… MB: Queer Pride. 
AJ: Queer Pride. MB: Yes. AJ: Uh, but I know you also do some other work too for the Transgender Law Center. MB: I do. I’ve been working for the Transgender Law Center for the last… almost three years. AJ: Mhm. 
MB: Uhm. AJ: In partnership with SONG? MB: With Southerners on New Ground. AJ: Yes. [Laughs]. MB: Give it to it. Twenty-five years of organizing and sass. [Laughs]. 
AJ: Wooh. Absolutely. Would a strong, queer, and trans, uh… MB: Feminist. AJ: … feminist analysis around the intersectional work that you guys do? So tell me a little bit about 
that work. 
Micky Bradford Interview 
MB: Yeah, my work, uhm, in the last three years has mostly been, uhm, about going on this listening 
tour at the south… AJ: Mhm. 
MB: … and really trying to understand what are the conditions, uhm, not just the conditions that 
people are under… AJ: Mhm. 
MB: … in different southern towns and cities but what, what are the ways in which people are 
practicing resilience? AJ: Right. 
MB: What are the new strategies that are emerging? What are the, the bleeding points in terms of 
jails, immigration, uhm, public health… AJ: Mhm. 
MB: … uhm, criminalization, right, of so many things: behavior, HIV, all the things. What are those 
bleeding points and where do people actually want to build power, right? Where do people 
want to come together and, and actually build a campaign to actually win some shit? AJ: Mhm. MB: Not just policy, not just a fucking reform but literally how do we want to come together to 
change hearts and minds… AJ: Right. MB: … across like all of these similar, very similar towns. AJ: Mhm. 
MB: Yeah. AJ: Wow, that’s amazing. MB: Yeah. AJ: That’s amazing. It is draining. I would, I’m not even imagining cause I do a lot of that kind of 
work and so I know that it can be depleting and but by the end of the day it’s really, you know, 
trying to create space and trying to, uhm, create opportunities for other trans and queer 
communities to, to lift themselves up… MB: Yeah. Micky Bradford Interview AJ: … that’s positive and that’s powerful. MB: Yeah. 
AJ: Yeah. MB: Sometimes it looks like, you know, uh, one of the only black trans women living in Fayetteville, 
Arkansas. 
AJ: Right. MB: You know, who’s, oh gosh, how old is she? Probably like into her sixties. She’s in her sixties. AJ: Oh my goodness. Wow. MB: Uhm, and then having her sit down… AJ: Talk about isolation. 
MB: Right! Right? Oh gosh, have her sit down with, you know, a twenty-five-year-old black trans 
woman… AJ: Mhm. 
MB: … uhm, and have them have intergenerational conversation about their organizing, about 
growing up, about what their state needs, what their community needs. AJ: Mhm. 
MB: That’s the type of work that makes me happy. AJ: Wow. MB: That’s to type of work I like to do. AJ: Uhuh. Wow, that’s fascinating. Uhm, have you had any challenges in healthcare or police or 
school or institutions? How do you navigate institutions as a queer black trans woman? MB: Oh. [Makes clicking noise with mouth]. Name some more institutions to get my mind rolling. AJ: Yeah, uhm, the medical industry, uhm, the police department, the DMV, uh [laughs], you know, 
colleges. Were you able to get your transcripts name changed or? MB: Uh, I’m real lazy with that stuff to be honest. AJ: Okay. Micky Bradford Interview 
1 MB: AJ: All my ID stuff has not been changed over yet. Tell me about your name. Micky. 
6 MB: AJ: [Laughs]. I chose it when I was like, what? Five, six, seven? I was seven. I was seven when I chose my name. Oh wow. 
11 MB: AJ: MB: AJ: MB: Because no one could freaking pronounce my birth name which is German. Uhuh. Okay. I’m not going to say it. Not gonna say it, okay. Uhm, but folks can look that up or whatever. 
21 AJ: MB: AJ: MB: AJ: Right. But folks cannot pronounce it when we got over to the states. Sure. So I was like just call me Micky. Uhuh. 
31 MB: AJ: MB: AJ: MB: And Micky has been my name ever since. So literally you don’t really have to, I mean… Nope, I’m Micky to everybody. Yeah. And that’s gender neutral enough for me. 
41 AJ: MB: AJ: MB: Yeah, absolutely. Wow. So at seven you were like, “I’m going with this.” I knew who the fuck I was. [Laughs]. Yes. This is me. Micky Bradford Interview AJ: Wow. MB: Call me this not that. 
AJ: That’s adorable. So you’re in the game. You’re like doing this leadership work. You’re organizing 
with one of the most venerable sort of queer people of color groups in the nation. SONG, I 
mean. People are just bow down. MB: [Laughs]. AJ: What do you see as the future of the trans community? MB: Oh wow. That’s broad. 
AJ: The future of the trans and gender non-conforming community, I should say. MB: Uhm, in terms of what? [Laughs]. AJ: Uhm, in terms of access. In terms of growth and development. In terms of, uhm, what are the 
political structures within the community that are around to support that kind of growth like, 
uhm, I mean, so TLC is one of those. MB: Right. 
AJ: The Transgender Law Center is one of the pillars that is sort of helping to sustain and, uhm, 
breathe life into the movement. [Laughs]. If you will. There’s organizations like TWOC, Trans 
Women of Color Collective and so, it, my question is, you know, given the fact that we’re now in 
an age where trans organizing and trans lib organizations are real… 
MB: Mhm. AJ: … and functioning. Uhm, what, what should our agenda be and, and where are we going in the 
future? 
MB: [Sighs]. Okay, so, couple of things. I want to name that I feel like we’re moving from what I saw 
as a movement, uhm, of leaders, uhm, where we have a model where you are a trans leader 
over here. You’re a trans leader over here in this place. You’re a trans leader over. We’re gonna 
bring all of y’all together… 
AJ: Mhm. MB: … and then we’re going to give you resources. We’re going to train you. We’re going to send you 
to places, and we’re going to try to support your growth, your leadership, your organizations 
that you started, your community groups. AJ: Right. Micky Bradford Interview 
2 MB: Uhm, and I think that also fits in line with a particular identity politic that folks are trying to 
3 understand where they’re like, “This is my identity. I’m a trans woman, and my relationship is 
4 this to cis women. My relationship is this to GNC people, and my relationship is this to other 
trans women, right?” 
7 AJ: Mhm, mhm. 
9 MB: Uhm, and I think that’s dope. And it also doesn’t necessarily allow us to build as strong of a 
gender justice movement as I want. Uhm, because it’s so individualized, and it’s so like, “Well, you’re a leader so we’re gonna build you up and hopefully you’ll build up other leaders.” AJ: Right. 
MB: Versus what I feel like we’re moving into now is more having a leader-full movement, right, where everybody’s leadership is valued, where there are more people being brought to the table, where, uhm, it’s not necessarily so much about a particular, uhm, activist but it’s actually shifting to be more about organizing and base building… 
AJ: Sure. MB: … and campaigns. Uhm, and getting those specific skills and that’s a whole, it’s a whole different ball game to me, uhm, to be an activist versus an organizer. And I feel like trans movement is moving towards more organizing, more community building, more, uhm, popular education and 
leadership development of all of us… AJ: Mhm. MB: … and moving towards an analysis that’s like actually, uh, cis women, trans women, GNC folks 
across the spectrum actually need to all be having conversations together. We can still have autonomous discussion… AJ: Right, right. 
MB: … but we’re all trying to have like more discussions and more strategies that actually build a movement of gender justice because we can’t do it by ourselves. There’s absolutely no way. AJ: There’s no way. 
MB: Patriarchy is fucking huge, and it’s the oldest goddamn oppression in the world like… AJ: Right. MB: … we gotta, you know? 
46 AJ: Yeah, it’s gonna take a whole group of people to bring it down. So including in coalition with cis women… 
Micky Bradford Interview MB: Mhm. We gotta learn how to work with them. AJ: … black women and white women, particularly white women, cause they, they got some work to 
do. MB: Mhm. [Laughs]. AJ: Uhm, wow. Great, great response Micky. Let me ask you this. And this will be our last question. 
Uhm, how do I frame this? Well, you know, I’m just gonna give it to you. MB: Sure. AJ: Is there anything that I didn’t ask you that you feel compelled to be sure is a part of this 
conversation? MB: Oh my… [Sighs]. AJ: You could name some names and lift up some people. You can say a prayer. You can… [Laughs]. 
You know, I mean, whatever. There’s no, there’s no rules. MB: I want to see a movement of joy. AJ: Mm. 
MB: I want to see a movement of hope. I want to see art that reminds us to look for the, the light 
that comes through even when you’re looking at a brick wall. AJ: Uhuh. 
MB: And you feel like there’s no way to move past this… AJ: Right. [Laughs]. MB: … with a little bit of light shining through the cracks. How do we… AJ: And there is like literally a brick wall right outside of our window. [Laughs]. MB: [Laughs]. I got a little bit inspired. 
AJ: Yes. MB: Uhm, but that’s what I want desperately is just a movement of joy and hope. Uhm, and the 
word is overused but resilience. 
AJ: Oh, it’s, resilience is critical though. 
Micky Bradford Interview 
MB: Abso-fucking-lutely. AJ: It is anti-black, anti-trans, anti-woman. MB: Anti-immigrant, fucking deeply rightwing, deeply about criminalizing every goddamn thing we 
do. AJ: Right. So I think resilience is, however overstated, it is still a, a value and a condition that we 
must continue to, uhm, strive for. 
MB: Abso-fucking-lutely. But it, it needs to show up in this like, when I say that I also mean that in 
our, the ways in which we talk about trans movement. AJ: Mhm. 
MB: Like trans girl to trans girl… AJ: Yes. MB: … the joys and all of that comes through. AJ: Mhm. MB: Popular culture though, absolutely not. I don’t feel like there’s any type of balance, uhm, 
conversation around who actually trans people are or what has been our movement, where 
have we been in other movements, immigrant justice movements. Where have we been in the 
movements against criminalization and against jails and prisons. AJ: Mhm. Sure. 
MB: Uhm, and there’s a… I just think that that joy, that that hope, it seeps into everything. It, it 
makes you wanna [signs] shift your perspective to look for more, to look for the solution, to look 
for the way out, to look for solutions that actually we weren’t thinking about before, to be more 
creative, to be more bold and vulnerable. It just, I wanna see, and this is why I believe so much 
in art and the power of centering our cultural work… AJ: Mhm. MB: You just can’t have that without art. You can’t have folks believing in this shit deeply within their 
fucking spirits without singing… AJ: Yes. MB: … and dancing and drag queens. 
AJ: Oh my goodness, yes. 
Micky Bradford Interview 
MB: You literally cannot have, this is the reason why I feel so connected to Sylvia and Marsha and 
Miss Major is because all these girls were showgirls. All of them were performers. AJ: Mhm. Absolutely. 
MB: Every single one of them was like, “I’m gonna get up in your face and change your fucking 
perspective.” AJ: Right. 
MB: Now go out and be happy. AJ: [Laughs]. MB: What the hell you got to be sad about? You ain’t me bitch. [Laughs]. And look at me. I’m fucking 
joyous. I’m up here giving you life. AJ: Yes. MB: Look at how I pulled through this struggle, this sorrow. AJ: Life. MB: Right. 
AJ: You give me life, [singing] Micky. MB: [Laughs]. AJ: [Still singing]. Oh, Micky. Micky, Micky, Micky. MB: Say my name, say my name. AJ: [Singing]. You are a beautiful creation, a gift to the universe, Micky. 
MB: Thank you. AJ: Thank you so much for this joyous… MB: [Laughs]. AJ: … conversation. MB: It was joyous. 
AJ: Uhm, I’m deeply humbled and honored and, uhm, until we meet again my friend. 
Micky Bradford Interview 
MB: Absolutely. Thank you so much for having me. AJ: [Kissing noise]. Peace. MB: [Laughs]. AJ: [Laughs]. MB: Oh, gosh. 