Dominic Giovon Chilko 
Narrator 
Andrea Jenkins 
Interviewer 
Andrea Jenkins -AJ 
Dominic Giovon Chilko -DGC 
AJ: So, hello. My name is Andrea Jenkins and I am the oral historian for the Transgender Oral History Project at the Tretter Collection at the University of Minnesota libraries. Today is June 2, 2017. I’m here in Minneapolis, south Minneapolis, and I’m caking it with my boy, Dominic Giovon Chilko. 
DGC: Giovon Chilko. 
AJ: Giovon Chilko. 
DGC: Yeah, a little Italian flair for you. 
AJ: OK, all right. So, just because I messed that up, Dominic, I want you to state your name, spell your name so we make sure we have everything spelled right, tell me your gender identity as you define it today, your gender assigned at birth and the pronouns that you use. 
DGC: Cool. I am Dominic Giovon Chilko. D-o-m-i-n-i-c G-i-o-v-o-n C-h-i-l-k-o. I identify as a trans man, I am straight. I was assigned female at birth and have been on testosterone three years in October. 
AJ: Wow, that’s what’s up. 
DGC: I’m getting it. 
AJ: So, to kind of get us going, kick us off a little bit, tell me what is your earliest memory in life, Dominic. What is the first thing you remember? 
DGC: My earliest memories, I would say, are playing outside and always feeling like I should have my shirt off or I should playing in the dirt and not with girly stuff, you know what I’m saying. All my memories, even like three years old, I remember feeling like a man – like a boy. I don’t have any girly memories, I don’t remember ever being dressed up or barrettes in my hair or my mom doing my hair. I remember playing with trucks and GI Joes and playing in the mud and always wanting to be around the boys. My mom thought it was because I was attracted to boys and in my mind, even from years old, I knew it was like I want to be one of the boys. All my earliest memories are of a little boy. 
AJ: Is that right? Where did you grow up? 
DGC: I grew up in Boston, Massachusetts. I was adopted at the age of one by my mother and father who live in Minnesota. We lived in Boston on and off until I was about seven or eight, we would come to Minnesota for a couple of months, go back to Mass and then we finally rested in Minnesota. I went to school here, I graduated here, I work here, I live here. 
AJ: Wow. Where did you go to school? 
DGC: I went to school at Everest Institute out in Eagan to be a medical assistant. I graduated with honors, as a valedictorian. 
AJ: Woo hoo. 
DGC: Yup, got the yellow ribbons and everything to prove it. Branched out, did some clinicals for a little bit and was like, “Nah, that ain’t me, I don’t like poking people, I don’t like sick people around me like that.” 
AJ: OK, but you went and got a medical assistant degree. 
DGC: Right, I don’t know what I was thinking. I was trying to do something. So, then I did driving for a little bit. I started delivering dry cleaning and I tried to do Uber for a little bit, but I was like, "You know what? Something’s missing.” So, then I became a PCA and now I love what I do, I absolutely love it. I wouldn’t trade my profession for anything. 
AJ: So, you did have a sense that you wanted to help people. 
DGC: Yeah, I just didn’t know how exactly. 
AJ: Yeah, that’s great, man. Where did you go to grade school, like when you were coming up? 
DGC: Man, I went to so many schools. I went to elementary school at Lincoln Center in South St. Paul, Minnesota. I started high school at South St. Paul High School ... let’s just say the people there were not very nice to me. So, I started acting out, so then I got sent to an ALC, which is an alternative learning center and I was like, “You know what? I feel like I’m too smart for this. These kids are not trying, I was actually trying but it was just that I was getting picked on and everything else.” I was like, “You all need to upgrade me a little bit or else I’m going to be dumb. You all going to put me in with the dumb kids, I’m going to be dumb.” 
AJ: Right. 
DGC: So, then I got to pick my school and I went to the High School for Recording Arts, HSRA, in St. Paul. 
AJ: Snap – I love that school. 
DGC: It used to be off of ... when I went there it was off of Cretin and Vandalia in St. Paul and when I tell you that that school changed my life with my music and my motivation and my math skills, social studies – they made everything around music so that the kids that were super involved with music would still get it ... math, science, all that around music. There was studios and all this and I don’t know -my creativity went crazy. 
AJ: That school was founded by T.C. Ellis. 
DGC: T.C. Ellis, who has worked with Prince and a lot of other well-known people. Yeah, he owns it. 
AJ: His biggest hit was with ... one of Prince’s girl ... 
DGC: I can tell you something, I remember it when I was in school because he used to play it all the time. I don’t remember it now, though – I’m sorry, T.C. 
AJ: He was on JoLo’s track. 
DGC: Yeah, yeah – he’s produced for so many big names. This dude, he put a school in Cali now and New York too. So, now, there’s one on the one end and ... 
AJ: I think he was on Jenny from the Block. 
DGC: I’m going to have to look this up now. 
AJ: One of JoLo’s biggest hits. But, at any rate, that’s a great school that people are really super – like you said, talented and committed to young people’s learning. 
DGC: Yeah, it’s crazy. 
AJ: So, it changed your life, huh? 
DGC: It definitely did. It opened my eyes up to what I’m capable of with music and how there’s no real gap on music – you can just keep going and keep going. And T.C. was the coolest mentor/teacher that you could ever wish for. 
AJ: So, he would teach in the school too? 
DGC: Yeah, he would come into our classes. He wasn’t necessarily a teacher, he was like a Dean of Students, but yeah, he’d come in and listen to lessons with us, help the teachers out, come in the studio with us, tell us if our music was good. He was so involved, that was literally ... that was home for me, that was home. I miss that school. 
AJ: That’s a beautiful thing. Were you bullied there? 
DGC: I was not bullied at HSRA. Everybody was doing their own thing. It was like ... 
AJ: If you thought you were a little boy when you were five, I’m pretty sure during grade school and high school you were out, you were ... I mean, sort of expressing yourself in non-traditional ways for a female. 
DGC: It seemed like at that school there was a lot of other people in similar situations. It was a very comfortable school, there was a lot of gay people, a lot of actors, dancers, singers, musicians. And in the art culture, it’s a lot more accepting than regular society. 
AJ: Sure. 
DGC: So, like I said, it felt like home. I didn’t necessarily say that I was trans back then because I didn’t even know what trans meant, but I was definitely out and openly gay. I was an openly gay woman and I was dating girls and people knew that. I didn’t feel the need to hide it at that school. I was dressing like a dude, had my little stud gear on, my short haircut and designs – everything. 
AJ: So, what labels have you used for yourself over time? 
DGC: Let’s see ... well, in the beginning obviously I was a straight girl, because I didn’t know no better. As I got into high school, I became a lesbian; more into high school, I became more of the stud. So, I cut my hair, thugged out – whatever. 
AJ: Timbos, sagging jeans. 
DGC: Right, right – sagging my pants, no belt, whatever. And then, I went through college as a lesbian and I was dating a girl that had a kid, everything like that. We was like a little family, whatever. But, I kept feeling like I wanted something more. Yeah, the little boy called me daddy but it wasn’t because I was a man, it was just because that’s what we told him to call me. So, I’m like, “Dude, I want to be the dad, I want to be a father, I want to be a husband. I don’t want to be your wife, I don’t want to be your girlfriend.” It would irritate me every time we would go out and she’d be like, “Yeah, this is my girl,” and I’d just be looking like, “Ahh, man.” So, after college is when I really started figuring myself out – like or years old. I met a trans man and I had no idea that he was trans. I was like, “Hey, what’s up, bro – whatever, whatever.” We get to talking and he starts talking about trans and I’m like, “What the hell is that? What is that?” He explains it and he says, “Oh, I’m trans.” And I’m like, “OK, what is that?” And he starts explaining it and I’m looking at him like, “Bro, you’re lying,” like there is no way he was ever female – look at your beard and your chiseled jaw and all that hair. And he’s like, “Bro, for real.” So, we went on Google for a good four hours and my mouth is just open the whole time, just reading all this stuff. 
AJ: Who is this guy? Do you remember his name? 
DGC: I don’t remember his name. Oh, man – sorry. 
AJ: But it was here in Minnesota? 
DGC: Yeah, it was here in Minnesota. But, no, we did a whole bunch of research and ... 
AJ: A Black dude, a white dude? 
DGC: A white dude. 
AJ: OK. 
DGC: Yeah, he was a white dude. We did a bunch of research and after that I was like, “Holy crap, I’m not crazy.” Like, “So, you’re telling me there are people that think like I do and there’s ways to do this?” I had seen Boys Don’t Cry but obviously everybody knows how that movie ends. He didn’t get no hormones, he didn’t have no therapist – none of that, so I’m thinking that ... 
AJ: Everyone called him she. 
DGC: Right, and he got killed for it so I’m thinking it’s like that and I’m like uh-uh. Uh-uh, I ain’t trying to play no girls ... 
AJ: Right, exactly. 
DGC: After I did that research, I was like, “You know what? I feel like this is what’s been missing, this is what’s going to make me happy.” So, I called the University of Minnesota Center for Sexual Health and I got me a little therapist and we started talking and within my first session, she was like, “Yeah, everything you said ... yeah, let’s get you on some hormones and this and that, and this and that.” I’m like, “For real?” She was like, “Yeah.” Two months later I was on testosterone and I’ve never looked back – never. 
AJ: Wow. The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies University of Minnesota 
DGC: Yeah, this is the best thing that’s ever happened to me. I feel comfortable, I feel safe which a lot of trans people can’t say that they feel safe but I feel safe in my skin now. Whether I passed or not, knowing that I’m doing what I need to do is enough for me and society can kick rocks – I don’t care. 
AJ: But you never get clocked, right? 
DGC: I did in the beginning of my transition because, if you remember, I was real little – I was like pounds, little curly hair or whatever when I first started transitioning. I was real, real tiny – like legs, arms, everything, so I started working out – bodybuilding right away, right away. Once I started doing that, that’s when I got real comfortable. I’m like, “OK, now I feel like I can go outside, maybe not have three sweatshirts on – just my binder and a shirt.” 
AJ: Right, just trying to bulk up. 
DGC: Right. Now, I’m bulked up so now my chest matches the rest of my body. 
AJ: So, you’re a bodybuilder. 
DGC: Yeah. 
AJ: A competitive bodybuilder. 
DGC: A competitive bodybuilder – I’ve competed two times in 2015 and 2016. In 2015, I placed 3rd place as the first pre-op man to ever place in the bodybuilding competition and then 2016, I was only three months post-op so I just went to prove that I could still do it. 
AJ: Right, to yourself. 
DGC: Right, right. That I could get on stage, take my shirt off again, and show my scars. So, I did that. I didn’t place or nothing, but it was cool. And then this year, I plan on doing it again and we’ll see what happens now that my chest has healed up and I can really work out. 
AJ: Wow. Well, now that you’ve mentioned that your chest has healed up, to the extent that you feel comfortable answering this question, what medical interventions have you undergone and I know you talked about hormones and top surgery, but let’s put it all together. 
DGC: OK, so as far as medical transitions go, I’ve gone through therapy, I’ve started hormones – that will be three years in October, so I take testosterone injections weekly. I’ve also had top surgery which, for people that don’t know what top surgery is, it’s the removal of the breast tissue to give a male appearance to your chest. So, they kind of contour your chest into pecs and then you work it out. It’s not like they’re going to ... it’s actually really, really flat so you start noticing other things you need to work on. But, that’s to be understood. There’s a couple different types of top surgery – key hole is for guys with really, really small chests to begin with, they usually go in through the nipple and just pull the fat out so then you’ll really only have scarring on the nipple. What I got, because I was a little bit bigger chested, was double-incision mastectomy and so I have a scar on each side right here that goes up to about right there. They curve, like pecs, so I’ve got the line right here and my pecs will slowly start to come in. Another one that I saw that’s new is called the T-anchor method and what they do is they start at your The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies University of Minnesota nipple, cut down, and then cut in an anchor shape and then pull it out like that and then sew that up and then you just have a little anchor scar. As far as bottom surgery, no plans as of right now. For me, it’s not advanced enough. I know what I want that to look like, if I had my choice. So, until they can transplant something real on to me, I’m good. I’m completely comfortable. I know you know my dad, Buck Angel, he’s completely comfortable with himself and he’s helped me become cool with that – whatever. 
AJ: So, you call Buck your dad? 8 
DGC: Yes, and he calls me his son. He’s planning on flying me out to L.A. to hang out with him – me and my buddy, Tyler, are his “kids”. He does a lot for us. He sends me gifts and things like that. He’s an awesome mentor; I met him, actually, at FitCon two years ago and we’ve been like this ever since. He’s an amazing man – amazing. 
AJ: Buck is an adult performer. 13 
DGC: Yes, he’s an adult film star as well as an advocate. He is also a huge cannabis advocate for medical marijuana and waxes and things like that. 
AJ: And legalizing ... 16 
DGC: And legalizing it because he lives in California so he wants it across the states. He fights really hard for, especially for trans men and cannabis because of the PTSD we get – the anxiety, everything like that, the trans community period. We need resources too, so that’s what he’s fighting for, but he’s pushing the marijuana a lot – and I’m behind him 100% on that. There’s so many medications they try to prescribe to us, whether it be anxiety medications, depression, and PTSD, they think you have a mental disorder. They’re always trying to medicate us trans people and we don’t need to be medicated – we are not crazy. I wasn’t crazy then and I’m not crazy now. If anything, you’re crazy trying to put me on all these meds that I’m going to get addicted to. Give me some marijuana, break it down, roll it up, smoke it – I’ll be calm and cool. I’m super against prescription medications, especially really, really strong ones. There’s no need. Unless you are in crippling pain ... 
AJ: I think there is some need for some people. 28 
DGC: People with chronic pain, things like that, but for the people with minor anxiety or minor depression and stuff, they’re loading them with medications and then they’re getting other side effects and suddenly they got anxiety or suddenly they can’t sleep. 
AJ: It’s just like any other drug dealer, man – they’re going to try to get you hooked. 
DGC: Damnit, drug core. 33 
AJ: Exactly. Wow, so talk to me a little ... this is fascinating, you call Buck Angel dad. There is sort of a history in the trans community about creating your own family structures. Can you speak to that? How does that impact your life and what’s your relationship with your birth family now that you’ve come out? 
DGC: OK. You’re right, the trans community does tend to come together as a family – people tend to latch on to other people and their transitions and their stories, which I find fascinating. I’ve got so many brothers and sisters and cousins and aunties and mamas and daddies, but it’s cool because it’s a family that understands exactly what you’re going through without question. When your family at home, they got a lot of questions; your friends out in the world, they’ve got a lot of questions; but the trans family, they know. They don’t have no reason to ask you, you just tell them if you want to. 
AJ: They know what you need. 
DGC: Yeah, and they know what you’re going through. So, it’s very comfortable to talk to your trans family. Now, my adopted family who is the family that I grew up, we’re cool. 
AJ: OK. 
DGC: Me and my mom, we’re super close. She calls me her son all the time, she calls me handsome – all that, boosts me up. She actually had a harder time when she thought I was a lesbian. 
AJ: Is that right? 
DGC: So, she’s cool now that I’m her son; she had a problem with the lesbian thing. I don’t know, we never really went into it but, yeah, she’s cool now. My dad, I guess he had mentioned something when I was or to my mom, “You know, Nicki’s going to be a boy one day, right?” My mom was just like, “Ahh ...” She just brushed it off, “Whatever, you’re crazy.” And now he’s looking at her like, “I told you, I told you.” So, he knew before I even had a thought in my head. He was like, “We ain’t raising a little girl, we’re not.” 
AJ: So, you all chill, you all cool? You all getting along? I mean, family is family but ... do you go there for Christmas and dinner? 
DGC: Oh, yeah, we spend all holidays together. Between my family and my girlfriend’s family, we make sure that we make it all work. I definitely have a close relationship with my mom – she’s been my rock. When I was about to be homeless, she helped me out; when I ain’t got nothing to eat, she will be there. Me and my dad, we have a good relationship when he’s sober. My dad is an admitted alcoholic and it’s just been rough. 
AJ: That’s tough, I’m sorry. 
DGC: It is tough. A lot of stuff was taken out on me that shouldn’t have been, and on my mom that shouldn’t have been – a lot of personal grief, things like that that he never got to handle on his own. But yeah, he’s ... I love him to death because he’s my father, but I hate to see him so miserable. I hope that he figures it out before he ends up by himself. But, I mean, I’m a grown man, I can’t babysit him. My mom is grown, she don’t want to be babysitting ... 
AJ: We’ve all got our own lives too. 
DGC: Right, we’ve got our own lives to live. So, he needs to stand up and stand out – go do what you need to do to get your head back in the game for your family. 
AJ: Yeah, I’m sorry to hear about that. But there is some relationship there. The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies University of Minnesota Dominic Giovon Chilko 
DGC: I definitely love that man. I respect him, but I just don’t respect some of his choices. 
AJ: Yeah, that’s real. Wow, man, a lot of stuff, Dominic. How did you come to your name? 
DGC: My birth middle name was Dominique. 
AJ: OK, so ... 
DGC: So, I took that and put it as my first name. My adopted mother is 100% Italian, so Giovon or Giovonni is the male version of my grandmother’s name, Joanna, in Italian. So Giovon is Joseph in Italian, so I took her name and made it into a male name and put it as my middle name, and then I kept my adopted father’s last name. 
AJ: Wow. 
DGC: Because there’s no more boys in the family that have boys and I kind of want to keep the last name going. 
AJ: Where does that name come from – Chilko? 
DGC: Very German. 
AJ: Really? 
DGC: Very, very German – yes. He’s 100% German. 
AJ: Is he chill? 
DGC: Not really. He be turned up – I’m the chillin’ one. 
AJ: 100% German. But your ethnicity is ...? 
DGC: I am Dominican, Puerto Rican, Black and white. 
AJ: Biracial. 
DGC: Yes. 
AJ: What is life like as a biracial trans ... biracial is definitely appropriate, but also ... Afro-Latinx. That’s ... 
DGC: That’s cool, I ain’t never heard that, but that’s what it is. 
AJ: Right. Dominican and Puerto-Rican. That is heavily ... both of those cultures are heavily influenced by African culture but also Latino/Latina culture. So, is that just chill for you and that’s how you roll through life? Or, does that create some different, unique challenges? 
DGC: It does and it doesn’t. It does because I was adopted by two people of white origin. I was raised well above my means – I was taken care of, I was spoiled, I’m an only child. I had both of my parents, I lived in the suburbs, things like that. When people find stuff out like that, sometimes they want to tell me I don’t know the struggle or try to kind of demean my person of color status. Like, “Bro, you ain’t dark enough to try to ride with us.” Dominic Giovon Chilko 
AJ: Oh, wow – so, colorism within the POC community? 
DGC: Yeah. I’ve been told several times that I’m not dark enough to care about the issues or I was too privileged, I’m a silver spoon baby, this and that. But, what people fail to understand is the reason I was adopted is because my birth mother was 15-years-old and strung out on cocaine and my birth father is over 35-years-old. OK. So, you can’t tell me I don’t know the struggle. I’m sorry that two very, very nice people took me in so I didn’t get killed, but that is not my fault. 
AJ: Why are you sorry? You shouldn’t be sorry. 
DGC: That’s what I’m saying, but it’s not my fault – I’m saying that sarcastically, like, “I’m sorry.” That ain’t my fault, I didn’t pick the family – the family picked me. And, even with that, I didn’t follow their ways, per se. I always tended to branch out into the colored people group – like at schools, functions, music-wise, everything like that. So, I have culture. I kicked it with my African­ American friends, my Cuban friends, my Hispanic friends. So, I know stuff. I’ve been to the hood, I’ve been to the burbs, I’ve been to this mansions. It’s just I was fortunate enough to be adopted by two people that really, really wanted a kid. 
AJ: And they really cared about you. 
DGC: And they really cared about me. But, at the same time, on this same subject, I also get a lot of praise – being biracial, being so visible on social media. I’m the dude that most people tell to shut up but then they don’t want me to shut up once I start speaking the truth. I’m very opinionated – especially when it comes to trans issues, I am so opinionated I be wanting to kick myself in the face sometimes. But, I get so ... 
AJ: Well, I want to hear a few of these opinions. 
DGC: I get so passionate about some things. I’m the type of person you either are going to love or you’re going to hate and there ain’t no in-between there, because I’m going to arrive at mine regardless of anybody else’s opinion. At the same time, the community kind of embraced me. I get those haters that are so, “Oh, you’re so privileged,” or whatever, but it’s mostly love. I’ve told my story, I put my coma out on Facebook, I put my top surgery out there, I put my life – my whole transition out there for other guys that are thinking about transitioning or may think that they are alone or things like that, and people respect me for that but I don’t think it’s necessarily because of the color of my skin; I think it’s because of the person that I am. 
AJ: You’re right, that’s for real. 
DGC: But the first part is definitely about the color of my skin and who I was raised by. 
AJ: Wow. You created a documentary, or you were a part of a documentary. 
DGC: Part of a documentary, correct. 
AJ: Tell me about it. 
DGC: The documentary is called Man Made, it is by a director named T. Cooper, who is also a trans male. Dominic Giovon Chilko 
AJ: Local? 
DGC: No, he is based out of Atlanta and New York, he travels back and forth. The documentary involves ... 
AJ: Black? White? 
DGC: What? 
AJ: What’s T. Cooper’s ethnicity? 
DGC: He’s either Italian or Greek. Italian or Greek, I think. 
AJ: So, white. 
DGC: Yeah, white. 
AJ: Which is cool, I just want to lift people up and hold up everybody’s identity. 
DGC: For sure. No, he started this documentary to kind of showcase the trans male part of transitioning because, as he says in the beginning of the documentary, there is usually only one side told about transgender and it’s usually the women, which I love my trans sisters – thank you. 
AJ: Right, right – thank you, very much. We love you too. 
DGC: Right, but we want to be visible too. So, with that thought in mind, he came up with this documentary called Man Made and it’s all about six trans male bodybuilders and their lives not only inside of bodybuilding, but outside. Some of us have kids, jobs, we got whole lives at home beyond this bodybuilding stuff – testosterone shots, doctor’s appointments, surgeries, comas for me, for example. And, he took two years out of his life to follow the six of us at different parts and different times of our journeys – different big milestones and things like that. It’s supposed to drop at the end of this summer, 2017, and we will be doing film festivals first with live question and answers, so I’ll be flying out a couple places. And then once it picks up, like people start picking it up, that’s when he’ll start shopping it to TV when he’s got the money to have the backing for it. But yeah, it’s going to be good, man. I’m honored that he came up to me two years ago and was like, “You look like you’ve got a pretty cool story, why don’t you talk to me for a couple minutes.” Two years later, we just finished filming and they might be at Pride too, to film my Pride performance. 
AJ: So, you’re performing at Pride this year? 
DGC: Oh, yes. 
AJ: 2017, June pride month – Happy Pride everybody. 
DGC: 2017, Minneapolis. Happy Pride. 
AJ: June 24th? 
DGC: June 24th, 4:15pm, Loring stage – I’m going to be there. Dominic Giovon Chilko 
AJ: You were saying you’ve got a pretty dope plan. 
DGC: Pretty dope set in mind. I do live performance, so I sing and I rap. I write all my own music. I got a couple of drag king numbers that I’m throwing in there, you’re going to see a lot of glitter from me – just know that. And, I got a couple special guests coming out to perform with me, also from the trans community but I don’t want to say no names right now. I don’t want to give nobody away. 
AJ: Well, whenever anybody watches this, they probably won’t ... that event will have passed. 
DGC: Way past. 
AJ: A long time ago, so actually you can tell me. 
DGC: OK, well, my buddy Jada Barber from Miami, he plays guitar. We did a couple videos for Facebook or whatever, and he’s going to come up and we’re doing to do some acoustics in the set. And then, I don’t know if ... I’m still trying to convince her to do it, but Kamaree Williams, my sister, I’m trying to get her to do one of my drag numbers with me. 
AJ: Wow. 
DGC: She’s so hot right now. 
AJ: A duet? 
DGC: Yeah – a little Nicki Minaj and Jason Derulo. 
AJ: Oh, OK. 
DGC: Yeah. 
AJ: Wow, so you went to the High School for Recording Arts, you are performing at Pride, you are a bonafide artist. 
DGC: Thank you. 
AJ: Tell me about your arts career, your music career. And, your ... because you did drag performance too, and you’re about to sort of re-engage that a little bit in this coming month. But, yeah, talk to me about your performance life. 
DGC: OK, well, I started performing, per se, when I was about 11. I started in plays. I used to have really curly red hair, so I played Annie. I got the role of Annie once. 
AJ: You played Annie before – wow. 
DGC: I’ve been in Little Shop of Horrors, a couple other plays. I was a big theatre geek because I loved music, I loved the lights, the sounds – you know, “Lights, camera, action,” I always wanted to be a part of that. So, I never wanted to be behind the scenes – I wanted to be right there. 
AJ: In front of the audience, in front of the camera – whatever. 
DGC: Yeah. So, I did a lot of plays, I was in choir – I did choir all throughout high school. 
AJ: So, you are a singer. 
DGC: Yeah, I love to sign, I love to ... I just love music, everything about music. If it wasn’t for music, I feel like I wouldn’t be who I am – so without that form of expression. I got real serious with music when I started at the High School for Recording Arts, because that was the first time I was in a million-dollar studio. I’m hearing myself and I’m like, “Yeah, you get it.” I was like, “All right, I don’t sound too bad.” So, after I ended at HSRA is when I really started taking my career seriously. I was in the studio every week, I was dropping music videos, everything like that. And then I came out as trans and suddenly all the hype for me being such a hot female artist ... I had won Best Female Rapper of the Year for 2013, I believe it was. 
AJ: Is that right? 
DGC: Yeah, for the state of Minnesota and I was a hot commodity then. But, as soon as I told everybody I was a man, it was like, “Oh, he’s just another rapper.” And everybody fell off ... 
AJ: Is that right? 
DGC: Yeah, all the people that wanted to collaborate with me suddenly went quiet, all the people that wanted me for shows suddenly went quiet. And, I’m like, “OK, it’s either you all mad and some trans bashers, or you all know that I’m coming for your spot now. It’s one of the two – either you’re all jealous or you’re all mad.” Because my music is still exactly the same, I put on the same show with the same energy, so I’m still good, I’m still me. But, what I tell people all the time is trans is what I am, but who I am still hasn’t changed. 
AJ: Right, that’s real. 
DGC: I’m still Lil One. It’s not like I changed my whole ... 
AJ: What’s your rap name? 
DGC: Lil One. 
AJ: Lil One, OK. 
DGC: But, now that I’m getting older, it’s gonna just be Dom Giovon, because I’m going to try to stick more into the R&B. I got a cool little DG logo thought up and stuff. So, yeah, I’m going to make it grown and sexy now that I’m getting old. 
AJ: Right. Getting old ... how old are you, Dominic? 
DGC: I’ll be in days, June 21st . 
AJ: You were telling me, though, that there was a shift – like you used to perform drag on stage. 
DGC: Oh yeah, with the drag thing ... 
AJ: And then once you started on hormones ... 
DGC: Yeah, with drag it was from to 21, that was my favorite thing on the planet to do – favorite thing. I was in the clubs at – Innuendo, in St. Paul, when that was still open, because didn’t The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies University of Minnesota Dominic Giovon Chilko nobody check IDs at the door. I was in there with the Triple Threat Royalty Kings, I will never forget that. 
AJ: Triple ... 
DGC: Triple Threat Royalty Kings. They are not around anymore because I know Spade moved to Cali and ... yeah, but back then, I would do drag. It was so comfortable for me to get up with there with the facial hair. I mean, I was not good by any means, with my facial hair – I looked so rotten. But I didn’t care, I got to be Usher and Chris Brown and all these attractive men that I desired to be at the time. 
AJ: Right. 
DGC: It was cool. We would travel to Cali and perform, it was cool. 
AJ: So, did you make good money? 
DGC: Oh, yeah, I was making good money as a little King. And then, I kept doing it for a little bit, fell off – got back into it, did a couple pageants like the Toast ... well, not the Toast, but the King pageants at the Town House, I did a couple of those. Then, when I started hormones when I was 24, I was like, you know your whole drag career has been based of the fact that you wanted to be another person – you didn’t want to be Nicki for a night, you wanted to be Chris Brown, Pitbull, whoever. But now, you’re not Nicki anymore, you’re Dominic. So, you’re not that person, you never have to be that person again – you get to be the person that you’ve been trying to be and I kind of just feel off. I was like, “You know what? I don’t feel the need to put facial hair on my face no more, or contour my face or anything like that.” I started seeing the changes and I’m like, “Cool, man, cool.” But now, I see a lot of my friends are Kings, a lot of my trans guys are Kings – like in Boston, I got a couple out here, and the impact that they’re making. Kings weren’t really that big when I was doing it before, now I’m noticing ... I just did a drag show out in Boston when I was out there right before my grandpa passed away, a lot of people have never seen a trans person, a trans man for that matter. And, on top of that, a trans man that does drag. I’m telling you, when I took my shirt off, money started flying at me. I’m like, “What the ... what is going on?” All because of my scars and there were people from England in the audience that were there on vacation and they came up to me and they said, “Your performance was so inspiring, you are so proud to be you.” And I’m like, “Bro, I ain’t never got this kind of love for taking my shirt off.” So, I might get back into drag because now it’s not that I want to be somebody else, now I can just have fun. I can do different things with my facial hair I already have. I don’t have to wear the tape or the binder – none of that. I’d be more comfortable now, but there’s always going to be a stereotype on trans men being drag kings – always. Well, there’s a stereotype on drag – period. If you are a biological woman or a trans woman, they feel that you should not be a drag queen, and if you are a biological man or a trans man, they feel like you should not be a drag king because you are already the gender that you are portraying. I’m not the person that I’m trying to portray every day. Do I look like Pitbull? Do I look like Neo to you? Come on -it’s being an entertainer. 
AJ: Right, it’s entertainment. Dominic Giovon Chilko 
DGC: Right. You don’t necessarily have to be a drag star, you’re an entertainer – that’s what you get paid to do is to put on some make-up and entertain somebody. It shouldn’t matter what you got going on, as long as you can make yourself look good under them lights. You feel me? I love it. 
AJ: You sort of ... do you feel like drag is a part of the trans community? I know there is a lot of people these days, like you were just saying, who want to dis drag and be like, “Oh, yeah, those are drag queens, that’s not real trans identity.” What’s your thoughts on that? 
DGC: I feel like ... hmm, how do I feel about that? I feel like balls are more popular in the trans community, like the ball scene, because of the categories that they have – they have straight up trans categories rather than just a one-way street type of thing. I don’t know, though, it’s kind of hard to say whether or not drag ... I haven’t been in a lot of states to meet a lot of trans people to see how drag affects them. Personally, from here to Massachusetts, it’s getting there – it’s getting up there. A lot more trans people are becoming comfortable enough to do drag, especially in Boston. They are killing it out there, we need to catch up. I hope one day it will be just a normal thing in the trans community – like, “Oh, he’s a drag king,” “Oh, she’s a drag queen, no big deal.” Your gender don’t define what you can do as a performer. 
AJ: True. I like that. Wow, you have been really beautifully honest today, Dominic. 
DGC: That’s what people tell me. 
AJ: Talk to me about your sexual identity. Who do you get down with? Are you in a relationship? Do you have some people ... your partner ...? 
DGC: OK, well, I identify as a straight trans man. Now, with that said, I consider trans women to be women also. So, when I say I’m a straight man, if I date a trans woman, I’m still a straight man because she is a woman. 
AJ: Come on now, bring the noise – bring the noise. 
DGC: I am currently with a cis woman, a white girl – she’s beautiful, gorgeous, everything I could ever want. She was with me before my transition, we broke up for a little bit, she’s with me now, so she’s seen both people and she loved them both equally, but she definitely likes me better now that I’m happy. 
AJ: Was the break-up around your transition at all? 
DGC: It was, it was. She had a little crisis within herself trying to figure out what this would make her identify as. 
AJ: Yeah, what does this mean for me? That’s a real thing. 
DGC: We came to the conclusion that she’s pansexual. 
AJ: She’s a lesbian, right. 
DGC: Yeah, she was a lesbian her whole life – but, yeah, we’ve come to the conclusion now that she’s pansexual – it’s hearts not parts. She loves me for me. Dominic Giovon Chilko 
AJ: Hearts not parts. 
DGC: Exactly – hearts not parts. 
AJ: I don’t think I’ve heard it quite phrased that way, but I love it. 
DGC: Yeah, pansexual – hearts not parts. But yeah, she’s been super supportive every step of the way – through hormones, through surgeries, she’s helping me get my hysterectomy finally scheduled and get all the ultrasounds done I need for that to get my recommendation. 
AJ: Oh, so that’s coming – we didn’t even mention that. 
DGC: Yeah, I actually had my ultrasound appointment yesterday. Now, for any trans person that doesn’t know how invasive these ultrasounds are, they are very invasive. Yeah. Well, first it was just a little regular ... I’m like, “Girl, I’m not pregnant, why are you doing this?” And then she was like, “OK, now I’m going to do the vaginal ultrasound,” and I’m looking at her like, “Who got a ...? Oh, yeah, I do.” “Oh yeah, I forgot.” I’m like, “I’ve got to go in the bathroom and take my ...” I got my whole thing on. 
AJ: So, you pack every day? 
DGC: Yup, I wear a packer, which is kind of like an artificial penis. I have an STP, which is a stand-up pee device, so I’m able to not only wear it to present, but I can also urinate with it. It words for sex, and I love it. But, yeah, packing is awesome – but it’s not for everybody. 
AJ: Do you pack when you go to the airport? 
DGC: No, that’s the one time ... I pack it in my bag that’s going on the bottom of the plane, but no I’m not trying to go through TSA ... I did it one time and dude was grabbing all of my stuff and he’s like, “What is this?” And, of course, at the time my ID still said female so I couldn’t be like, “Bro, that’s my dick.” 
AJ: I’m sorry for laughing. 
DGC: No, that’s cool – it’s funny. I couldn’t be like, “Bro, that’s my dick,” because he’d be looking at my ID and be like, “Oh, that’s your dick, huh?” 
AJ: I’m thinking about that one song, “Wait until you see my dick.” 
DGC: Right, they take me in the back room ... the lady took me in the back room and she pulled my pants down, the thing fell out and I was like, “I told you.” She was just like, “We just had to ...” It was so embarrassing, I was like, “This is so embarrassing, I told y’all I was trans, I even had my pieces of paper saying what I should be called,” and things like that. I was pretty manly then too. I haven’t had any problems with TSA since my ID changed. I should say more or less since my ID changed and I got facial hair, because before I had the facial hair, I looked like a baby stud – a baby lesbian. Crazy. 
AJ: How long have you and your partner been together? 
DGC: We have been on and off for almost seven years. 
AJ: Wow, that’s a long time. 
DGC: Mostly on, but everybody has their moments. 
AJ: Right. 
DGC: Yeah, we live together in St. Paul, Minnesota. We have a cat baby – she’s the love of our life. 
AJ: Nice, cool. 
DGC: We are talking about children, obviously it’s not a simple situation. So, we’re looking at perspective ... 
AJ: So, you’ve got to put a little effort into it. 
DGC: Yes. We are looking at potential donors, also we’re looking at sperm banks, and then possibly getting some of my eggs, if I have any left – which I probably don’t, but it’s worth a shot. I’ll take that invasive procedure to see if I’ve got any eggs left so I can have a baby that looks like me. 
AJ: Right. 
DGC: But, yeah, she will be the one carrying the child. I’ve never had a desire to carry a child. I know mentally I couldn’t handle it. Physically I could; I’m healthy but my mental state would be terrible. I would be depressed, so I wouldn’t be eating ... it wouldn’t be healthy for me or the baby for me to be pregnant with how much of a man I see myself as. So, she wants to carry the baby ... now, with that said, if she is unable to reproduce, then I will consider stopping my hormones to bear a child for us, but that’s the only way. So, I’m hoping to God she’s fertile. 
AJ: She probably is. 
DGC: She probably is – her mom was and her grandma was, so she better be too. 
AJ: Yeah. Wow, that’s beautiful – that’s a beautiful thing, man. What do you think the relationship is, as you’re getting ready to perform at Pride, it’s June – Pride month, what do you think the relationship is between the L, the G, the B, and the T? 
DGC: Here you go, you wanted to get me going. So, the LGB got their thing and then the T, like way over there, and I don’t like it at all. I’ve seen a lot of hatred from the LGB side to the T side, but I’ve also seen a lot of hatred from the T side back – that’s how a war starts, that’s how war starts. I feel like we are becoming closer to the LGB part because we’re becoming more known and we’re more visible and stories are being written about us – you’re writing books. Trans culture is becoming relevant but I feel like until we do something absolutely epic, everybody is still going to focus on the LGB and the T is still going to be silent, until we make it un-silent. 
AJ: Right. Well, the name of my book is The T is Not Silent. 
DGC: I know. I was trying to use a little reference from you. 
AJ: I see, I feel you. 
DGC: Right now, it is silent. You advocate, I advocate, we know tons of amazing people just in Minnesota alone that advocate, but we need to get people like us in every single state to make Dominic Giovon Chilko the same difference that me, you and everybody else makes. There is strength in numbers. If only a couple of us are visible, that’s cool – whatever, a couple people might catch on. But, if all of us are visible, just like at Pride when we take over the park and they’ve got a couple bashers, but who’s the squad? The LGBT community, the squad at Pride. We don’t ... no, it’s strengths in numbers. If we could get like, I don’t even know, a group or a panel or something in each state, that would be dope. That would be something I definitely would drive for. 
AJ: Yeah. So, that kind of leads into my next question. What do you think the agenda should be? If these panels come to be, what should they be talking about? 
DGC: They need to talk about real-life issues ... trans suicides, trans murders, hormones and what they can actually do to your body if you don’t take care of yourself or if you’re getting them under the table. The emotional aspects of being transgender – you’re not going to just take hormones and be happy. I know a hell of people that are depressed, have contemplated suicide, have PTSD or have had traumatic experiences. We need to talk about rape – a lot of my friends have been raped. 
AJ: Trans men? 
DGC: Trans men and women just trying to be who they are. We should be able to walk outside and feel just as comfortable as the next man or the next woman. Nobody asks for that, I don’t care what anybody says – just because you’re wearing a short skirt, that don’t mean that you asked for somebody to come up and put their hand up your skirt. You’re trying to be cute. We need to talk about hatred within the trans community. There are so many people that are either jealous or trying to step on somebody else’s toes in the trans community, and I have to reiterate all the time -no two people’s transition is going to be the same, by any means. Your body is your body, their body is their body, how yours changes and how theirs changes is going to be completely different. He may get facial hair after the first month, you may get facial hair after two years. Don’t try to piggyback somebody else’s transition and then get mad when you ain’t seeing the same things as them. That’s your genetics, that ain’t their fault. Or, I’ve been hearing the words cissy trans a lot and that makes me livid. I don’t see why trans men can’t wear make-up. Why can’t trans men wear make-up? Why can’t you be a pretty boy trans man? OK, but you can let cis gay men wear make-up? That don’t make no sense to me. You can’t pick and choose – it’s either you accept it for what it is or you don’t. You can’t be like, “Oh, my gay homebody looks good with eyeliner but my trans homebody, now he’s gay.” Listen to what you just said – you said, “Your gay homebody.” OK, maybe he’s gay. 
AJ: I know a lot of gay trans dudes. 
DGC: I know a hell of gay trans men and that also puts a lot of trans men in a category. I’ve been asked if I’m gay so many damn times, there is such a huge thing out there that people think that trans people are automatically gay – every single last one of them. “If you’re trans, you’re gay.” 
AJ: Wrong. 
DGC: Stop – bro, stop. That’s like saying if you’re a cis man you automatically like woman and if you’re a cis woman you automatically like men. Dominic Giovon Chilko 
AJ: Yeah, that’s just not the reality. 
DGC: No, that’s not how it works. You like who you like and that’s it. It’s crazy. But, yeah, no – we got some work to do, definitely, within our own community. One of the biggest things that I stress on when I’m live and I’m doing my educational videos, not just smoking, but when I’m actually educating people, I stress on if we want to be taken seriously as a community, we need to start taking ourselves seriously – wholeheartedly 100%. 
AJ: Andrea snaps her fingers. 
DGC: These straight people, or cis people – whatever, they’re looking at us from the outside, they ain’t in our community so they don’t know what goes on in our community except for what we show them and how we’re acting out and things like that. So, they’re taking off of that – ain’t none of them lived a day in our shoes. 
AJ: Right. 
DGC: So, if you want them to take you seriously, give them a reason to. Don’t be fighting people when they ask you questions, educate them; turn around and educate. You know what pisses people off more than yelling back at them? Putting them in their place with education. You need to educate and motivate and inspire people to want to change their minds. A lot of these . . . especially the older cats, the older cis cats and straight people, whatever, they grew up thinking that we were absolutely wrong – that we ain’t shit, that we are abominations, that God don’t love us and this and that. It’s on us as a community to inform them otherwise – that we bleed the same as they do, we breathe the same oxygen as them. It shouldn’t be a, “Oh, there’s this community and then there’s this community.” We should all be a big family. I know that’s a big stretch, that’s a huge stretch because I know a lot of people that do not like me but I’m saying that if we took the time as a community to take ourselves seriously, all of us took the time to educate ourselves like you do and I do and Rox does and everybody else, and then educate the masses ... I feel like the hate wouldn’t be so hot no more towards trans people. We’ve got to take ourselves seriously though first. We can’t be fighting with each other. 
AJ: Yeah, no – that’s real. I believe in visibility. It’s a double-edged sword but it’s what it’s going to take to change hearts and minds. And that’s why I’m doing this project and I’m so thrilled that you are a part of it. 
DGC: Well, didn’t nobody get nowhere just sitting on their butts – you’ve got to get up, stand up, stand out. 
AJ: You’ve got to get up and get out, give something. So, Dominic, have you ever volunteered or worked with an LGBT organization before? I know you’re doing your thing on stage, but have you ever been just down with a straight up organization? 
DGC: Not really, actually. I’ve never really ... 
AJ: You’re a RARE production artist though, right? 
DGC: Well, I was. I don’t know about now – I haven’t really talked with Rox lately. They’ve been super busy with everything. But, yes, anytime RARE has a show, you know I’m there. 
AJ: I think once a RARE production, always a RARE ... 
DGC: Exactly. If RARE ever has a show, just know I’ll be there because I love them – period. 
AJ: And, just for clarity, RARE Productions is ... 
DGC: Roxanne Anderson’s music/talent/artist/enterprise. It’s a collective of LGBT artists. 
AJ: Queer and Black. 
DGC: Mostly people of color, yes. 
AJ: Queer and trans people of color. 
DGC: It gives us a place to be heard, we don’t get that a lot. But, yeah, I ride for RARE. 
AJ: Any other organizations? 
DGC: Not really. I went out and helped with Boston Youth Pride when I was out there a couple weeks ago. I met a lot of the trans youth, some beautiful little trans babies ... oh man, oh man, I’m so excited for the next generation – they’re going to be so handsome and beautiful. Oh, man. But, no, I’ve really just ... I reach out to people through social media when I see that they’re down and out or if they have questions. I always tell people no question is a dumb question if it’s for educational purposes. Now, if you’re trying to ask me what’s in my pants, you’re going to get blocked, but if you come at me correctly, I will come back correctly. 
AJ: Right, right. 
DGC: No question is a dumb question when it comes to me. I say that very lightly, but I mean it. But, no – I’m more of a person to reach out to people. I’ve never really been part of an outreach group though. I would love to do whatever. 
AJ: I’m just asking, I’m not saying you should do that but a lot of people do so I’m just trying to follow-up. 
DGC: It’s been talked about. 
AJ: I mean, just living your life – just living our life is putting in work. 
DGC: I was going to say it’s like a movie. 
AJ: Yeah. So, there’s no pressure. But, just kind of wrapping up a little bit, man. You talked about these gaybies, what do you think the trans community will be like in years? 
DGC: Honestly, with how good people are getting with educating the youth and how I’ve watched a lot of trans men and trans women finally embrace the youth, so our gaybies, I feel like the world is going to be a lot better place in years. I feel like trans isn’t going to be a commodity, per se, like it is with the news and everything right now, it’s just going to be something normal. At least that’s my hope for the next generation – that y’all can just be you. You don’t have to worry about certain doctors turning you away because they don’t like what you’re doing or certain therapists or being judged. I want it to just be like you could wake up in the morning and be trans and that’s it – no weight on your chest, just, “Hey, my name is Alex,” and that’s it. “My Dominic Giovon Chilko name is Mary,” and that’s it. Not, “Hey, I’m Mary and I’m a trans woman.” I just want it to be normal – the kids deserve that. Just like with me when I was younger, I didn’t ask for this – it’s not like I was, “Oh, one day I’m just going to be trans.” I’ve always been trans. It’s not a disease, we’re not mentally handicapped, anything like that. There’s nothing wrong with us – there’s nothing wrong with us. And, that’s what I want to bring to the kids – it gets better. When I was or years old, I wanted nothing more than to crawl in a hole, but look at me now. I’m so visible, I’m out, I’m happy, I’m proud of who I am, I’m living my authentic life. 
AJ: Seven years in a relationship. 
DGC: You know what I’m saying? It gets better. 
AJ: You’ve got a job, you’ve got a musical career, you’ve got it going on son. 
DGC: Right. You’re going to have somebody who is going to love you for you. You’re going to find a job where the company respects you as the man or woman that you are or meant to be, you’re going to have family members that are going to leave but you’re also going to have family members that are going to stay. On top of that, you’re going to make new family members within the community. My biggest thing is that it gets better. It may not feel like it in the moment because I’ve had moments where I’m like, “Dude, I want to give up. This is so much maybe I should ...” But then those thoughts go out of my mind as soon as I say it. I’m like, “No, maybe you shouldn’t have because you would have been more miserable then than you are now.” Life gets easier, but you’ve got to know that it’s going to get worse before it gets better – you’ve got to go through the motions first. 
AJ: That’s what’s up – that’s deep. 
DGC: It is. 
AJ: I know you’re biracial, but when you’re walking down the street, I’ve got to believe that you are perceived as a Black man. 
DGC: Actually ... 
AJ: What is life like as a Black man? And maybe you’re not, I don’t know. You were going to say, “Actually ...” 
DGC: Actually, I get clocked more Hispanic than anything. 
AJ: Is that right? 
DGC: Yeah, or white – sometimes even white ... just really tan. I think it’s because of how I grew up. I don’t talk like a lot of my friends. My mannerisms ain’t like I’m from where a lot of these people will be from, nothing like that. I don’t dress like anything but me so I wouldn’t put a specific category on the way I dress but I guess little white boy-ish, if you want to put it in perspective. I like to be clean-cut and everything like that. But, it kind of depends on where I am. Like out here, I mostly get clocked for Hispanic. A lot of other places it will be either Black or white, or mulatto – so Black and white. I’ve never been just clocked as just a Black man. 
AJ: OK, so that’s not really your reality. Dominic Giovon Chilko 
DGC: No. 
AJ: Is it different, though, as a Latinx man versus a Latinx woman? 
DGC: Yeah, we’re held up to certain standards too, just like in the Black community how Black woman and Black men are held to certain standards. As a Hispanic man, you should be ... you know, a good worker, a reliable worker, you should be able to work for a long time, you should be able to provide for your family, you need to be the breadwinner, you need to be strong – but educated at the same time. All these things ... and with the Latino women, it’s crazy for them. It’s like almost any other culture – you should be good at cooking, you should be good at cleaning, you should bear my babies, you should be super educated but stay at home and take care of my kids, blah, blah, blah. Typical Hispanic culture. But then, I also have my Black roots in me so I don’t necessarily live by the Hispanic ways. I kind of just do me. 
AJ: Right. 
DGC: I wouldn’t really put a category on how I act. I’m just the man of the house. 
AJ: You’re a new breed. 
DGC: Yeah, for real. 
AJ: Remember MC Breed. I know a little bit about hip-hop. 
DGC: You better. 
AJ: Hey, listen. Is there anything that I have not asked you that you want to make sure is included in this conversation? 
DGC: Yes. The last thing I want to leave people with, and make sure that they understand, is not every trans man is going to have or want surgeries or hormones or anything like that. And not every trans woman wants to get breasts and be on hormones and have bottom surgery, but that does not make them any less of a man or any less of a woman. And that’s it. 
AJ: Snap, snap, snap. Peace out. 
DGC: Peace out. That’s a big ... 