Venus de Mars 
Narrator 
Andrea Jenkins 
Interviewer 
Andrea Jenkins -AJ 
Venus de Mars -VD 
AJ: So, good afternoon. 
VD: Hi. 
AJ: My name is Andrea Jenkins. I am the oral historian for the Transgender Oral History Project at the Tretter Collection at the University of Minnesota. Today is September 12, 2017, and I am in northeast Minneapolis for a ... 
VD: North ... 
AJ: Actually, north Minneapolis. OK, I’m in north Minneapolis and I’m here for a second interview with Venus de Mars. Venus, how are you? 
VD: I am good, always in a scramble, but I’m good. 
AJ: That’s our life, right, it’s always kind of like a scramble thing going on. So, Venus, we’ve done this interview once before and we really talked a lot about some of your early days and that kind of stuff, but just because this is a separate interview, can you just state your name, spell your name, make sure we got it all spelled correctly. State your gender identity today, your gender assigned at birth, and your pronouns. 
VD: OK. So, Venus de Mars. V-e-n-u-s, like the planet, de Mars, lower case d-e and then M-a-r-s. So, kind of like de Milo. 
AJ: Right. 
VD: So, it’s kind of a play on Venus of Mars, which is the documentary. 
AJ: Right, yeah. 
VD: So, Venus de Mars, Venus of Mars. And, so I’m a trans female, male to female trans. Born ... actually, I think I was born with duality. 
AJ: Really? 
VD: But, technically was raised and on my birth certificate it says male. But, yeah, I had surgery when I was a baby that I found out. 
AJ: Wow. 
VD: And, evidently it was ... well, that would explain a lot, but back then it probably appeared that I was more male than female, so they went in that direction. It might not have been as pronounced as some people. But, that was something that I suspect was the case. 
AJ: That happened for you. 
VD: Yes. 
AJ: Where were you born? 
VD: Duluth. Duluth, Minnesota, and I think it was St. Luke’s Hospital. 1960. 
AJ: 1960. And your pronouns are? 
VD: I’ve been doing he/she. 
AJ: He/she? 
VD: No, no – why did I do that? Not he/she, she/her. 
AJ: She/her. OK. I was going to say he/she that’s an interesting choice, but some people do. 
VD: Yeah, it used to be ... because my transition has been really long, meaning I came out as trans in the mid-1980s and maybe even the early 1980s to people close to me – my wife and then immediate family. But, my transition has been so slow and because I didn’t, because I’m a singer, I never altered my voice or tried to change my voice through practice or surgery or anything like that. For a long time, it felt like I didn’t worry about gender so much, so either/or. But, as I have moved farther with my transition now over 20-some years, and just age, I think, I’m feeling much more comfortable with the female pronouns. But, it’s developed over years. 
AJ: Sure. You mentioned the documentary Venus of Mars. Talk a little bit about that. I’ve seen it, I haven’t seen it for a while – for a long time, but it was emotionally moving, it was very ... I mean, it was deeply music based and the music is amazing. 
VD: Thank you. 
AJ: But, what was that process like for you? I think you were ... it’s a documentary, right? 
VD: Yeah. 
AJ: So, they followed you around for a long time. 
VD: Yeah, the filmmaker and the crews that she put together, they were different people but a core that she would rotate and sometimes just herself, followed us for about four years – not constantly, but off and on. And then, if we were on tour, pretty constantly. 
AJ: Right, and they would go on tour with you guys, right. 
VD: Yes. So, she followed us to New York a number of times and to England. And then, let’s see, the film was finished and then in 2004, had its premiere in Amsterdam at the Paradiso for the Amsterdam Film Festival, that was a premiere, so we performed there for that. And that was . . . well, I was just looking at my memoir and that actually premiered at the end of 2003, so that was the first show of it. So, it technically was finished in 2003, just before that, but then it went into formal ... the formal film festival circuit all through 2004 and it actually went through and 2006, so it did a three-year run on the film festival circuit, which is unusual for a film. 
AJ: Yeah, usually they’re airing out in one cycle. 
VD: Yeah, that just kept getting invited back and it, of course, tapered off, but the last one was in Spain, one of the last big ones, and that was in 2006. And, that actually was a small town in Spain called Tui, T-u-I, near Portugal, and that was their ... it was called Play-Doc and that was their debut festival, the first time they had it and we were a part of that first thing. And, they’ve done it continually since then, so they’ve been going forever. That was a real important time for us; it was also right after I had put the band on hiatus. 
AJ: All the Pretty Horses. 
VD: All the Pretty Horses. 
AJ: Which was a m
AJor musical tour de force, I would say. 
VD: Yeah, well, we worked really hard, and that’s kind of what the memoir that I’m writing is about, it’s all of that whole time. When you’re trying to be successful in rock-n-roll and you’re doing that just normal work to get ahead, I had the boost of the documentary that was helping me expand my footprint and my tour possibilities by getting us farther than just in the states. But then, being trans was good and bad – good in that it caused attention. People were curious so they wanted to find out, but bad on the business end of it – the music industry was afraid of that and didn’t feel like it was something they could sell. So, I could not get anywhere with the music industry. 
AJ: What do you think the music industry is like today for trans artists? 
VD: It’s great – like that is a plus. 
AJ: Is that right? 
VD: It’s a plus right now. It helps your career; it might even be kind of in the middle of that right now and so therefore, they might be cooling off on it. 
AJ: OK. 
VD: But, they’re not afraid of it like they were, at all. 
AJ: Who are some trans performers that you can think of. 
VD: Well, the big one is the person that I toured with, that’s Laura Jane Grace. 
AJ: She is hot, yes. 
VD: And her band Against Me! She really did ... I think she was the one on the cusp of that changing landscape in the music industry. So, when she came out, her record support people embraced it and went with it and took advantage of the new interest in the press over that and it propelled her career forward, even though there were internal issues I know of and some changes in her band and in her relationship. That’s her story. 
AJ: Which, I’m very honored and grateful to say, we have her story as a part of this ... 
VD: Oh, well – wonderful, there we go. Hello, Laura, you’re just right over there – on that shelf. 
AJ: On that shelf. 
VD: Great. Yeah, I was lucky enough to spend a month touring with her with my band and it was a wonderful experience. And, to be honest, I have to say, when she first came out, I felt jealous because when she came out, it was the right time so it helped her career move forward and I had been out there struggling for almost years before that. And, it was doing nothing but destroying my possibilities to move forward in my career. I felt an irony which was terribly frustrating. But then, the way the world works and karma works, I get a chance to meet her and I have to be humbled, and she is a genuine person that is struggling just like everybody. 
AJ: She is, absolutely. 
VD: And, trying to navigate and she just was lucky enough to find the right time – none of us choose when we come out, it just happens and we have to. 
AJ: Yeah, but you helped to create the right time, you were out there blazing a path. 
VD: Well, yeah. I think that is ... yes. You know, I wanted to be successful and I wanted to have a career in rock-n-roll and I wanted the big records and I wanted the record label and I wanted financially to be able to take care of the debt and the investment I had put into the project – all of that, you want all of that. 
AJ: Absolutely. 
VD: So, yeah ... I think I did make a difference and I did get farther, but I had to. It wasn’t something that I thought, “OK, this is what I’m going to do; I’m going to change the world.” 
AJ: Yeah, you were just trying to make music. 
VD: I’m just trying to get ahead in a business that I love doing. I love being on stage and I love the excitement of rock-n-roll and interacting and that kind of excitement. I was inspired by David Bowie and the Ziggy Stardust era and that 1970s glam stuff – not the hair metal. Everybody thinks I was into hair metal; I was not. I was just past that. I was ... 
AJ: Define hair metal Is that like ...? 
VD: Hair metal is a lot of spandex ... they did have a lot of gender play, a lot of gender shifting, but nothing upfront. They were all doing it with a big helping of masculinity and so it was ... 
AJ: I’m trying to think of the band with the make-up. 
VD: Oh, sure almost everybody was doing that in the hair metal, with big poofy hair, but then they would be very masculine with the rest of it. I just didn’t ... 
AJ: Just gimmicky kind of ... 
VD: Yeah, I didn’t get into it. I was much more interested in the way Bowie did or T-Rex did back then where it was more genuine and more honestly exploring sexuality and gender without fear of consequence – more of a challenge to it. Whereas, I think in hair metal there was a hesitation and there was a protective layer going on with hypermasculinity even though there was gender play and obviously ... and that might speak to the times too. I think things might have been a little bit more open and exploratory in the 1970s, but in the 1980s things were starting to get very defined gender-wise, and then, of course, in the 1990s it got very absolute. And that’s when I was working – in the 1990s, as trans out. I’ll just ramble forever. 
AJ: No, this is fascinating. 
VD: I’ve found the only place I was able to gain a foothold and to move forward was in the fetish world. 
AJ: Like balls and rubber balls. 
VD: Yes, fetish balls. There were a lot of big national ... that was kind of when fetish kind of came out from the underground in the 1990s and it became kind of fashionable and I think Madonna did this exploration – she did a lot to pull it out ... 
AJ: Mainstream. 
VD: Yeah. And before that, I had kind of fallen into it on a more general level just because that was also a place where I was able to be myself and explore as a trans person – and Lynette, the two of us, were falling into that whole scene. Mostly for the fashion and the social and interaction, but we were seeing all of it and exploring and sharing and seeing other people’s fetishes and what they were doing, but we weren’t seen as the complete freaks that the rest of the world was seeing us as. 
AJ: Right. 
VD: So, we found some comfort there and then, in the band, opportunities came up because I was out in the band and I loved the fashion and I wanted to be strong onstage as a trans person, so I gravitated to the dom look. That attracted a lot of people’s attention in the community, so our fan base was a mix of fetish and the trans community was really, really emeshed in the fetish community back then because the gay community wasn’t really accepting the trans community. 
AJ: Trans identities, yeah. 
VD: I mean, there was a drag culture, but a lot of performers I knew who were doing drag were kind of adamant that it was theatre and not identity. 
AJ: Right, very much so. 
VD: It was kind of insulting to consider the possibility ... and then some of the performers who did explore actual identity and moving, they kind of got pushed out of the whole scene. 
AJ: Right, yeah. 
VD: So, it was a really bizarre place and the trans community really didn’t have a home and it didn’t really have an identity for itself, for its own community. It wasn’t seen as a community, it was seen as a fetish. So, that’s where I was working musically; so, I did a lot of that and that got me moving forward and the audiences were growing and the interest was there. And then Emily Goldberg, the filmmaker for the documentary, happened to be friends with one of my studio neighbors, in my old studio in downtown Minneapolis, and she had been working for the PBS TV as a filmmaker for them and had filmed me previous to my transition and coming out for Art Cars. So, she knew me previously in my artist self, as my male self, in the early, early 1980s. 
AJ: I ran into Emily a few months ago. She’s still working in film. 
VD: Oh yeah, yeah – she’s still doing it. So, I was part of the Rifle Sport art scene in Minneapolis. 
AJ: Where was that? 
VD: That was on E-Block before it was town down. It was right next to Moby Dick’s. It was kind of a takeover gallery by an artist who was living illegally in the space and then she, that was Colleen Barnett, and she turned it into a gallery, an underground gallery, it wasn’t an official one. But, it gained official attention. Then her husband, after that ... Bill ... it was just on the tip of my tongue while I was talking – that’s the problem with these things, it’s like I don’t have a chance to sit down and you just have to ... Bill Taylor, that’s it. They were married in the gallery and I was one of the core artists, because I got in kind of at the ground floor, and I was doing installation work and paintings. I drove my art car, which was a Honda Civic that I had done, up the stairwell and secured it in the stairwell. 
AJ: What? 
VD: Right there in downtown Minneapolis. People had to squeak by on the side. I have video of all this – I do. 
AJ: Really? 
VD: Yes. 
AJ: You drove the car up the stairwell? 
VD: Yes. We had to do it at like in the morning and we staged it all. That was when Hennepin was a one-way street and I had to go the wrong way, so we had to plan it and Bill was there and we opened up the double doors and we had the chain all ready and we had the ramps all ready. I came around with my Honda Civic, made a U-turn, went up over the sidewalk and straight to the thing – and got right there to the ramps and then just ... 
AJ: Floored it. 
VD: Yeah, pretty much. And it’s a straight stick, so I was struggling ... I had no clue that degrees is incredibly difficult to drive up in a car. I worked ... I just gunned it and gunned it and gunned it and finally got the backend far enough in so that we could shut the doors and then we chained it up on the stairwell fence and ... 
AJ: Hoisted it up? 
VD: And just held it there. 
AJ: Oh, wow. 
VD: And then I built the installation in the stairway and in the car there. That was because they didn’t have room for me to have anything in the gallery proper and I said, “Well, how about the stairwell? Let me do the stairwell.” And they said, “OK.” So, yes, that was my big infamous ... 
AJ: Did they know you were going to drive an art car in the stairwell? 
VD: They did, they did. But, they got very scared once we really saw the gravity of doing that – but it worked. 
AJ: Wow. 
VD: So, that was a pretty big deal. 
AJ: So, you’re a musician and a visual artist? 
VD: Yeah. 
AJ: And, one of the reasons why we’re doing a second interview is because we’re here in your studio and you have two sound booths here. 
VD: Yes. 
AJ: You have the master controls, which is kind of where we are right now. 
VD: This is my control area, so I’ve got one larger control booth over there, and then I’ve got a smaller one over there and they’re connected with video cameras back here and then I talk to people through there. This is basically ... I’ve just been able to finish this about four months ago; I’ve been remodeling for almost a year, this space, and I finally got it so it’s functioning. I am still not working full-on as a recording studio, but it’s functional and now I’m just trying to get people to come in and start working, and I’m doing my own stuff. And, right now I’ve been doing some mastering for some people and that kind of thing. But, it’s what I’m hoping I can spend more time doing. 
AJ: And then you have sort of a visual art studio right next door. 
VD: Yes, that’s next door to this – a large space, which has enough room for a stage where we can rehearse if I’m working in a band setting, or we can use it to film music videos or convert it into whatever. It’s large enough for my large paintings, my paintings are like 8’ x 12’, they’re real large. And, then I’ve got my little animation table, I do filmmaking. So, I have an animation table – I can do animation, traditional, and a little lounge area. 
AJ: Sure. 
VD: I’ve got a pinball machine. 
AJ: Yeah, it’s pretty amazing over there. What would you say is your influence for your visual art? And then I want to hear about what you’re doing musically now. So, visual art, what influences that? 
VD: Well, I wanted to finish one thing. Emily Goldberg was friends of the neighbor, she heard the band rehearsing there and came over to ... because my friend who was the neighbor said, “Yeah, we can introduce her.” And she remembered me from previous and then when she opened the door, I was me with breasts. And she was kind of completely floored by that; she didn’t really know what to think about it. But then, immediately, her filmmaker mind triggered and she said, “I want to make a film.” And she asked me within days after that if I’d be willing to Venus de Mars do it and, of course, I wanted to originally because I thought, “Well, wonderful way to get free publicity.” 
AJ: Right exactly. 
VD: And then it slowly developed into a story about me and Lynette, not just the band and me. And then we had to kind of reconsider it all, but then we agreed and we went with that. We can talk about ... 
AJ: It’s very much a love story, right? 
VD: Yeah, and the film ... 
AJ: Or, a story about love, maybe. 
VD: Yes, it is. And she was really nice ... she was really generous as a filmmaker. I mentioned to you before when we were on camera, I’m writing a memoir around ... from 1998-2006; being when the film finished its run and I had put the band on hiatus, All the Pretty Horses. 1996 was before the film started and I was just beginning to push the band to begin climbing, so it was kind of like the most things happened during that timeline. And, I’m writing about this whole thing and trying to sort it out; I’ve been doing it for years and now I’m really trying to formally work on it. Lynette is writing a memoir also about ... 
AJ: Lynette is your wife. 
VD: Yes, she’s my wife, and she’s writing a memoir which is overlapping that, although she’s going a little earlier, so she’s dialoguing in her memoir more about my initial coming out and transition and how she grappled with that. And we both have been talking within the last couple of weeks about one particular argument that we had in New York, which really kind of blew everything apart – and Emily was filming, and happened upon the argument in front of the hotel, the Carlton Arms Hotel, we were at. And, Lynette was screaming at the top of her lungs at one of my bandmates and I was trying to navigate, she was also screaming at me, and Emily, the filmmaker, and her camera person were walking right up and instead of jumping into the mix and trying to catch that big meltdown, they didn’t, and they kept to their original plan of interviewing each of us and keeping on course. And what happened then, and that would never happen now with a filmmaker, they would just go after it. 
AJ: Oh, yeah – reality TV, right. 
VD: Yeah. And so, what happened was, she gained our trust and we were able to get much deeper in interviews with her because of that – because we trusted her not to sensationalize. 
AJ: Sure. 
VD: And so, the film is what it is, and I think on a level it got fairly deep with questions and exploration in those early days. The film came out in 2004. The memoir that we’re working on now, what we want to do is get past that. We want to go into the real nuts and bolts, the real trouble. Lynette and my relationship unraveled and we’re trying to figure out why and how that happened. And so, we’re talking ... as we’re trying to re-create the timeline, we’re going back to those really difficult times and trying to understand why and how that happened, what we were thinking, what we were afraid of, why we felt our relationship was threatening us in some way or was falling apart despite our best efforts. And, we’re trying to really get down to the foundations and those experiences in the memoir. So, the film is a very nice piece. 
AJ: Sure, but it’s not the whole story. 
VD: I’m hoping the memoir is going to get very detailed and very intimate and very deep. 
AJ: So, you said the relationship unraveled. Where are you guys now? 
VD: We’re together, we’re fine. 
AJ: OK. 
VD: But, we separated for almost a year. 
AJ: Wow. 
VD: Twice. The first one was on my leaving and the second one was on Lynette’s request. The second one was a longer one. Yeah, we lived apart. The first time was a trial and we tried it again, but that lasted about three months; and then the second one lasted for about six months – twice as long. That one was pretty much we were trying to re-build our lives away from each other. 
AJ: So, I had started in kind of just asking about what influences your visual art. 
VD: Yes, yes, yes. So, back then, before I transitioned, I was doing everything I could to try to, (1) avoid trying to deal with being trans because I had no language for it, there was no language for it. I didn’t know what it was. I understand, at that time, being transsexual, but that all entailed moving away and re-inventing yourself and coming out and re-creating a life separate from the life you know, and that seemed very frightening to me. I also didn’t know how to go about doing it because I grew up and this was all happening in Duluth and Minneapolis, so I had no resources. I didn’t know how to even explore what to do. If I had been on either coast, I might have had more options to explore, but this was before the internet – there was no Google, there was nothing. You would have to come out to your doctor, which was very threatening and that wasn’t a good idea back then – that was not a good idea. It was a very scary world back then. So, I was trying to avoid all of that and I was really going into being an artist and exploring my otherness through art. I was going as far out as I could in that whole world and I became an installation artist, inspired by all of the art stars from the 1980s in New York, the New York art scene. 
AJ: So, Warhol and ... 
VD: All of those people – yeah, all of those ... oh, God, I can’t think of them all now. But, they were ... I could get a paper and write it all down. But they were the artists ... Keith Haring. 
AJ: Keith Haring ... Venus de Mars 
VD: There was another installation artist ... I’m forgetting his name, but he would re-do cartoons and he was doing all this stuff. There was a big explosion of interest in the New York art scene. 
AJ: Sure. 
VD: I was so fascinated, so interested in all of that, that I began to work in that medium. 
AJ: Basquiat kind of came on the edge of that. 
VD: Yeah, yeah. All of that – really experimental art and really working with the element of time. So, creating an art piece that you actually walked into, treating the space so that you became part of the art rather than just looking at the art. Those things were just fascinating to me. I had been in music before that, I had a band previous to that, so I understood the rock-n-roll stage and all of that. So, I had this element of time that I really wanted to explore and I brought it in in the form of installation work. Found Rifle Sport when I was starting and brought my portfolio over there and invited them to my home, which was in north Minneapolis – an apartment that we were renting and I had turned that into a gallery space, an installation space, and they loved it and they gave me space to do all of that. And so, I became an artist in that style and stayed with them as my gallery until they closed. And then, I couldn’t get into any other gallery. By then the whole interest in the Minneapolis collecting arts had dried up, the banks who were investing in art, they were driving a lot of the investment at that time, they quit doing that. And so, I could never find another gallery to go into. I tried doing independent shows, but my subjects were all trans figures, so they were exploring the dualism of a trans character ... 
AJ: Body. 
VD: A trans body on a large format, so there was always a penis. And that was so threatening to people that every time I did something, I would either get criticism from people seeing it or from the establishment that let me do it. I had art shows taken down, I had a big one that happened – that we tried to do in a hair salon in the Lumber Exchange Building and they just shut that down the day it opened. The owners of the building were like, “No, you cannot have that up.” I had to take it all down. I had one at ... which is the Black Dog Café, but then it was Copernicus. 
AJ: In St. Paul? 
VD: In St. Paul, but I got very mean comments in my book, people were really upset about the imagery. I did one at a café ... before it was Black’s Café, it was a little breakfast spot in downtown Minneapolis, then it became Café Solo, that’s when I went and did it – this is back, now, in the 1980s. And, I did a big installation there with all my paintings and I got death threats in my notebook. I had business people go to their office and type up how they would never come back to the café until my work was down, and then they came back and taped it into my comment book. 
AJ: Oh, my goodness, wow. 
VD: There was a lot of hatred and a lot of anger at representing trans figures in visual art in a public space. 
AJ: I mean, art should have some visceral response, right? Venus de Mars 
VD: Yeah, I pushed it. And, in doing that, I began to confront myself. I started not, but then as it went I was kind of at the front lines and I began to ... it actually gave me the language I needed to understand who I was and through some therapy sessions and marriage counseling, because my struggle in myself was destroying our marriage at that point. I had a very good therapist that was able to help me face and admit to myself that I was trans. But, in doing that, there was no help. I had kicked myself out of the mental health system by coming out as that. He was overjoyed. I’m sure he was part of the LGBT community but he couldn’t come out to me on that level because it would have threatened his job career because that was a time ... there was no protection for any of us. He wasn’t trans; I believe he was gay. But, he basically said it was a huge breakthrough, “We’re on the right track, you’re on the right track,” he tried to help me out all he could by giving me a little care package of phone numbers and suggestions, but then just said, “I can’t officially help you any more in this setting.” 
AJ: “You’re on your own.” 
VD: Yeah, “You’re on your own because we can’t ...” 
AJ: Where did you go after that? 
VD: I didn’t have therapy. I called one of the numbers, which was a number for, and it still is in existence now ... now it’s called the City of Lakes Crossgender Community; back then it was City of Lakes Crossdresser Community. 
AJ: Right. 
VD: But, it was just basically a club, a clandestine club, for crossdressers – technically open to anybody, but it was primarily male to female crossdressers who were middle age, more suburban. They had freedom and they had the money to be able to put together these kind of clubs in their houses where they could have a party and you would be welcome to cross dress. Super secret, you didn’t know anybody’s real names, you had to go through an interview to be accepted, and in your birth gender not in your chosen gender. 
AJ: Not in full chosen gender. 
VD: Right. And, a lot of the members were feeling the pressure of losing their jobs or their families or anything if they got outed, so there was all these protocols to keep people’s privacy in place. And, it was very strict and very important. Spouses were welcome to be part of it and so, what I did is I found that a little place for a number of years. I actually became an artist, I created the logo which, I believe, is still in existence, in use. 
AJ: Yeah. Wow, you created the CLCC ... OK. 
VD: The CLCC logo. And, I had a little comic that I did in a newsletter and I got involved – I got to be one of the interviewing people who went on interviews to help bring new members in. 
AJ: So, you were like moving up into the organization. Venus de Mars 
VD: I got very involved in it until I got to a point when it had expanded enough to begin to bring in people who were identifying as transsexual. By then, I had come out to my band and publicly and I wasn’t satisfied with just being in this little clandestine place, and so I needed to be out ... 
AJ: You outgrew it. 
VD: I had to be in public. Lynette and I were going out, we were clubbing, I was on stage, and it became too small for me, really. And so, I kind of just moved away from it. 
AJ: Sure. 
VD: But, it was an important place for me for a number of years. 
AJ: And, they’re much more open now, right? 
VD: Yes, 
AJ: Wouldn’t you say? I know the group still exists and ... 
VD: Yes. Yeah, they’ve really expanded and they’re more open, they’re more involved, they’re more advocacy – a whole different thing than it was. I think they still have the umbrella option for people who are closeted and are trying to be private, but that’s its foundation. There are people that still need that. 
AJ: Yeah. So, you are one of the rare people on the planet that was able to make a life and a living as a working artist. 
VD: Yes, yes. 
AJ: I would say under some of the most challenging of circumstances, given your gender identity that was once despised and now somewhat embraced, but actually we’re moving into an era where trans identity is under attack again. 
VD: Yeah, it is. I think it’s always been there. I think the support was louder for a long time, but now with our change in government and the attitude, it has given permission for people to voice their displeasure and their fears of the other and feel justified and empowered by doing that, which is a frightening place. 
AJ: Sure. 
VD: So, those groups of people are getting louder and getting unified and it is a frightening thing to see that unfold because we’ve seen it happen before in other countries and how far will it go here? Are the safety places that we’ve built in our government going to really withstand or are they going to crumble? This is probably the most dangerous place for America to be, I think, with a sitting president who is making an atmosphere kind to that kind of unfolding landscape – that is very frightening. So, yeah. I did not try ... I didn’t want to be or try to be an activist, I was just trying to get somewhere in a career and getting frustrated and angry that it wasn’t working and I couldn’t see why. And then, because I was traveling and I had to deal with people, as a trans person, I kept my birth name and my license and that kept me on the front Venus de Mars lines traveling overseas on tour or anytime I had to deal with any medical or legal people, that was something I had to self-advocate for. 
AJ: Had to deal with, yeah. 
VD: I got kicked off jury duty and right soon after ... we had just passed the Human Rights Act, which included trans people, which I discovered was ... 
AJ: Right, 1993, I believe. 
VD: It was the first in the nation to include trans people. 
AJ: It was, absolutely. 
VD: And, within a year after that, I was on jury duty and they got confused by my appearance and my name and there was an argument over whether I should be on jury duty or kicked off of that particular call, because it involved child molestation. And, the defendant ... 
AJ: Wow. Are you kidding? 
VD: No. And the defendant was fine with me being on jury duty, but the prosecutor was not and it made it to the judge, who had to rule and he ruled that I was not a protected class, which was wrong. 
AJ: Not true, yeah. 
VD: Because we had just passed this thing, but he ruled that and basically saying that the prosecutor could presume that I would be biased in favor of child molestation because of the appearance and the clothing that I wore, and my presentation. 
AJ: Oh, that is so gross. 
VD: And so, I was kicked off jury duty because of that ruling and it hit the newspapers and every place and it went ... back in the day, without any internet, it went viral – at least here in Minnesota. And so, that kind of outed Lynette and I. I contacted Lambda ... at that point, I knew I had been in contact and was working with John Killacky, who was the performance art director at the Walker; I had been filmmaking, I had done some work ... I had been working with John and Patrick at Patrick’s Cabaret, I had done ... 
AJ: Patrick Scully. 
VD: Yes. I had done some work with Channel to do some film work with Tim Miller, who was one of the NEA Four when he was in town. So, we did a film together, which actually got censored from Channel at the last minute, so there’s a whole other story. So, John encouraged me to contact Lambda; I contacted Lambda, and they were ready to take on the case and go into a trial, or challenge it in court, but Lynette did not have tenure and she became very afraid of her job security and was already ... 
AJ: Your partner is a writer and a professor. Venus de Mars 
VD: And a professor, and she felt like it had already rocked the boat with her school that she was teaching at, because it was everywhere – on all the news, and I was presented like I was dressed like somebody from Priscilla Queen of the Desert, like I had done it in order to get out of jury duty, which is not what happened. I was just being androgynous. 
AJ: Oh, my goodness. You were just being you – yeah. 
VD: So, that was an issue, so we didn’t pursue it and we just let it kind of unfold. We did an interview with the Star Tribune and the irony of that interview, although it was nice -it was a human-interest interview, but they were more interested in how bizarre it was that I had tried to go to jury duty and they didn’t even talk about how this was not right because of the new legal decision being made giving protection to trans people. 
AJ: Or, I wonder, did they even talk about the insulting nature of you would be sympathetic to a child molester because of your identity. 
VD: I brought it up, they didn’t. We still have the article ... I’ll probably be writing about it in the memoir, it’s on my timeline. 
AJ: Wow. 
VD: No, it was such a different world. And, I have to say that I didn’t even have the sense in myself to know how to counter that – that story was a story that I had been told so much, that it was internal. I had to spend so many years untangling a storyline about what being trans was in myself. 
AJ: Oh, wow. 
VD: And that was a long process of fighting through things – on stage, being on the front line, seeing things unfold in ways that were harmful. Yeah, it was a long process of self-awareness really. 
AJ: So, you’ve been a part of this trans and gender non-conforming community here in the Twin Cities from one of the early organizations that have helped to create space for the community . . . I know you and I worked together in the All Gender Health Program at the University of Minnesota and that was years ago, in the mid-1990s, I would say. What has changed, in your mind, about how transgender people have been included in mainstream culture in Minneapolis? 
VD: I started ... when I toured New York, began touring in New York with the band, I understood and became aware of how they worked on nights, theme nights, creating an atmosphere – not just bands playing in a line-up with an opener blah, blah, blah. They actually created an event. 
AJ: Gay Night and Women’s Night, Salsa Night, right? 
VD: Yes. We were out in New York during SqueezeBox, at Don Hill’s and there was a lesbian night, Fraggle Rock, and Meow Mix had nights. There was a place ... actually a place I’m going to be performing at, the Parkside Lounge, there was a night called Cheese Whiz, which was ... 
AJ: Cheese Whiz. 
VD: Cheese Whiz, which was a night for trans people and the little cabaret stage in the back of the bar, and that was ... I performed at the Meow Mix one night and a friend of mine who was out as trans there and performing in rock-n-roll also, brought me down here for the after party. I met some of the trans women who were there on the front lines at Stonewall. 
AJ: Oh, wow. 
VD: They were elderly at that point, but they were still out and doing stuff and being part of the scene. 
AJ: Sure. 
VD: Some of them had been drag queens back in the day. So, I would be introduced to these trans women all around there, all dressed up. Jane County was performing. 
AJ: Who was that? 
VD: Jane County. 
AJ: Jane? 
VD: Jane County, she used to be Wayne County. I think we talked about her in the last interview. 
AJ: Yeah, yeah. 
VD: She was part of the Max’s Kansas City rock-n-roll era with ... it was Jane County and the Electric Chairs. She was part of the Bowie scene and the Warhol scene. 
AJ: The Velvet Underground and all of those guys. 
VD: Yes, and she came out and transitioned while she was in career as a rock-n-roll artist and she moved into the early punk era days and became an early punk icon trans person. 
AJ: Jane County. I don’t know that name; I’ve got to look her up. 
VD: She’s still alive, she is down south. My dancer, Shannon, is still in contact with her. I met her a number of times and we performed together. She’s an icon and has her own story. She put out a book, I think Man Enough to be a Woman or something like that. I’ll have to get that title. 
AJ: I love that title. 
VD: Exactly. But, she talked about coming out in the 1950s and doing stuff like that. But, her own story is kind of detailed in that book. I read it, of course, that memoir. So, I saw all of that and then I brought it back to Minneapolis, and I started building theme nights. One of the theme nights I had ... I had my fetish nights I was doing, which was brand new here, so we had big fetish nights and I was getting a lot of attention with those theme nights, but then I started a trans night called The Kitty Cat Shack, which was at the Turf Club. I was trying to specifically encourage trans people to come out and to be out and in the open and in the scene. I would get emails and I would get phone calls from fans that wanted to know if it was OK if they came as their trans selves. I said, “If I’m on stage, you’re OK, because if the audience is there for me, they’re going to be OK with you.” More often than not, they did not feel brave enough to do it Venus de Mars anyway. But, I would talk to them sometimes in the audience and I would find out who they were and they would ... eventually they started to come out, but it was very slow and very careful. It would happen here and there in the fetish scene – here and there, not very much. It was so underground and so closeted, I really felt like one of the only people around. And even when I went to New York, most of the scene there was drag and then they had that separation of theatrics and then your real life. 
AJ: Right. 
VD: The trans people out there, it was more than here, but it was in very, very early stages. There was a club called the Now Bar that used to have a trans night, but then that also turned out to be a pickup night for a lot of working girls who were taking advantage of that night. You would go there and you’d have to be prepared for some requests that you would have to turn down, because that was the scene. But, we used to do cameo shows there with the band and the people that ran the night ... Glorya Wholesome and her husband, Gil. Glorya was one of the drag queens there that was working as a trans person and had transitioned and made that part of who she was. 
AJ: OK, wow. 
VD: So, she was also another person who was an activist in the early days out there. They were very supportive of me and my work, so we would get a ... I’d be able to do a cameo there to kind of set up the weekend gigs that I had planned. What’s changed now, long time around to answer your question ... 
AJ: No, that’s fine. 
VD: ... is that it’s amazing, it’s amazing. Kids in grade school are coming out, feeling comfortable enough to come out to their parents – in grade school. Parents are recognizing kids expressing and not following gender stereotypes and they’re letting them explore and giving them space to find how they feel. It is amazing to me and, with that movement forward as you talked about, there is the backlash and the anger against that and feeling like that’s wrong. But, as a trans person and knowing my own growing up and isolation and mental health struggle, this is like the best that could ever happen. And then we can’t forget that this is just here in America and probably specifically in the more urban areas, not in the rural areas. 
AJ: Rural areas are still struggling. 
VD: This is a limited bubble of experience and forward thinking. But, it is more and more and when I toured with Laura, I got a chance to see that full on with her all ages shows, which were the shows that we did when we toured and all of the trans kids, almost exclusively the kids that came, were trans or at least ... or at least were trans open, but the m
AJority were trans kids. 
AJ: Wow. 
VD: And their parents, their parents would bring them often. So, it was just amazing to me what’s changed in my lifetime that I didn’t expect. I’m trying to think of what was the tipping point. Venus de Mars Thank you for your generosity in offering me a place of trying to lay some foundation work. I didn’t set out to do that, but I think it happened. 
AJ: It absolutely happened. 
VD: Because I had to navigate my life. I think the tipping ... but then, Jane County was before me – and Stonewall and those drag queens I met at the Parkside Lounge, at the event Cheese Whiz, they were there before me. 
AJ: Yeah, Miss M
AJor and Marsha P. Johnson. 
VD: Yeah, they were getting arrested, they were the ones that the police were targeting and ... 
AJ: Yeah. 
VD: The tipping point, I think ... Laura has to have part of that. I think her coming out when she did was a significant tipping point in the social scheme of things. I think she has that position. 
AJ: Yes. 
VD: And what else happened? I think the activism of the trans community as a whole ... I saw the beginnings of that out in San Francisco. They had a rebellion before Stonewall in San Francisco. 
AJ: Yes, the Compton Riots. 
VD: Yeah, and so they ... 
AJ: The Compton Cafeteria Riots. 
VD: Yeah. So, they were already ... when I was touring out there with the film festival, I saw the activism there in a group so much farther along than we were anywhere else. They made a big difference. And the organization of those people caused the President, President Obama, to acknowledge trans people. I think that was another tipping point – when he included trans people in his State of the Union address. 
AJ: Yeah, it was huge. 
VD: That was immense – and then he followed it up with the bathroom bill recognition and suggestions, which unleashed the backlash, but that was also a tipping point of the support. So, I think those three things were significant and the point where things changed. 
AJ: Sure. Venus, you are an amazing performer and singer and songwriter. Would you be willing to share a number with us? 
VD: Sure – we’re at that spot. OK. I won’t scream my head off because the business that runs the warehouse that my studio is in is still working upstairs. 
AJ: We’re here during business hours today. 
VD: I’ll do it with as much force as I can do. 
AJ: What’s it called? 
VD: It’s called Take My Shoulder – and this is actually the song that while I was on tour with Laura, my producer, who is in New York and a friend of mine and I’ve been working with for yours, and she also produced a lot of the music that was used for the film Venus of Mars, those albums, worked with Laura and I to try to coordinate the possibility of Laura guest featuring vocals on a song and this is the one we finally were able to coordinate and she was very generous to find the time in her tour schedule to add a little bit, so this is the song where, on the recording of it, she ... 
AJ: Did you guys record in the same place? Or, she sent you vocals? 
VD: No, wouldn’t that have been nice. She found a recording studio somewhere. I sent ... my producer sent her the tracks and then she was able to add her track to that and sent them back and then we incorporated the two and mixed them. 
AJ: Wow. 
VD: But, that’s the way the world works now. 
AJ: Yeah. 
VD musical performance: take my hand take my shoulder I understand I can hold ya I know you can, You're something bolder There's is no plan And it's getting colder Oh my brother see my sister there are no others there is no difference I could be you I could be you you could be me (you could be me) We struggle onwards and desperately there's too much fear there's too much hardness there's too much fear it's me stop your hate stop your gun stop your fighting we are one hold me sister hold me hold me bother hold me hold me father hold me hold me mother hood me hold me sister hold me hold me brother hold me hold me father hold me hold me mother hold me hold me sister hold me hold me brother hold me hold me father hold me hold me mother hold me hold me sister hold me hold me brother hold me hold me father hold me hold me mother carry me I'll carry you we could be stronger (we could be stronger) we could be true (we could be true) make me wise make me breathe make me feel you make me grieve 
AJ: Whooo. Thank you so much, Venus, for your journey, for your music, for your artistry, for your creativity, for your love. I’m so honored to call you a friend and so honored to have shared this past hour-plus with you just hearing a little bit more about your story and your life. I’m deeply grateful. 
VD: Thank you. Thank you for including me. 
AJ: Yeah, wow. That song is so powerful. I’m in tears, literally. 
VD: It’s a good one. 
AJ: It absolutely is. With that, I don’t think I can have any more questions that are going to be able to top what we just heard here. I am just going to close it out and say thank you so much. 
VD: Thank you. 