Jess Dugan 
Narrator 
Andrea Jenkins 
Interviewer 
1 Andrea Jenkins -AJ 
2 Jess Dugan -JD 
AJ: So, hi. 
JD: Hi. 
AJ: My name is Andrea Jenkins and I am the oral historian for the Transgender Oral History Project. 
Today is January 22, 2016. We are in very chilly Chicago, Illinois, and I’m talking to a new friend, 
Jess Dugan. I’m going to ask you, Jess, to introduce yourself. Can you tell me your preferred 
gender pronouns, tell me your gender identity and your gender assigned at birth. 
JD: OK. So my name is Jess Dugan. I am female assigned at birth. I currently use female pronouns 
although I have not always done so. I identify as gender queer and gender variant. 
AJ: Jess, spell your name just so that the transcriptionist is clear. 
JD: Sure. It’s J-e-s-s and my last name is D-u-g-a-n. 
AJ: I know Dugan is sometimes spelled with two g’s. 
JD: Yeah. 
AJ: Thank you. So, just to get started out, tell me what is your earliest memory – like the first thing 
you remember in life? It doesn’t have to be related to your gender identity at all, though if it is 
that’s great and that’s perfectly fine. 
JD: That’s a tough question. I don’t actually know what my first memory is. Sometimes I get 
confused with what I remember from pictures and stories and what I remember from the 
moment. 
AJ: Yeah. 
JD: The thing that comes to mind is my parents getting divorced when I was 7. That’s one of the 
first things I really remember experiencing. Yeah. 
AJ: Where did you grow up? 
JD: I grew up in Little Rock, Arkansas. I lived just outside of Little Rock in a town called Sherwood. I 
lived there until ... well, I lived in Arkansas until I was turning 13, but I lived in several 
different apartments and houses in and around Sherwood. 
AJ: So you went to elementary school outside of Little Rock? Sherwood? 
JD: I actually went in Little Rock. 
AJ: Oh you went in Little Rock. 
JD: I went to a school in Little Rock. I was in a school that had a gifted and talented program that 
was also kind of ... I’m trying to think of the right language. It was also part of an integration effort in the city so I was bussed minutes to go to this school. But it was in Little Rock, it’s 
right by the airport. 
AJ: That’s interesting because I was going to bring that up. Little Rock is the site of the Brown vs the 
Board of Education and one of the school districts that was sort of first ... most violently sort of 
integrated. 
JD: Yes. 
AJ: But it seems like there was a reverse sort of integration. 
JD: Yeah, it’s funny because ... 
AJ: Usually the Black kids were being bussed to white communities. 
JD: Yeah. It is kind of reverse and it’s one of those things that I obviously ... or perhaps not 
obviously, but I wasn’t fully aware of as a younger child and became more consciously aware of 
later. But yeah, it was a ... I went to a school that was in a predominantly African American, 
low income neighborhood. But there was a lot of friction between local students and those of 
us who came in for this program. And it was a complicated place to be for a number of reasons. 
For those reasons and also for me around my gender, that was the first ... school was one of 
the first places where it really became difficult. I think when it ... when I became very 
conscious of being different. 
AJ: Really? 
JD: So when I think of that school I think of the larger issues going on but also my experience in that 
place. 
AJ: OK. It was pointed out ... was it violent, was there bullying? 
JD: I wouldn’t say ... it was not violent, but I liked to joke that I looked kind of the same then as I do 
now. I had short hair, from as soon as I could pick my own clothing I wanted boy’s clothes. 
AJ: Was it that your hair just wouldn’t grow or you just really preferred short hair. 
JD: No, I adamantly wanted short hair. 
AJ: Your hair looks pretty thick and it looks like it would grow pretty long. 
JD: It is pretty thick. No, just all of my friends were boys, I gravitated towards masculine clothing, 
and I kind of grew up being perceived as a little boy in Arkansas, except that I was not supposed 
to be a little boy. So from the time I was five, I would say, I became aware of that. So at school, 
I would get picked on and I would have a lot of trouble around the bathroom. I have a lot of 
memories as an eight and nine-year-old being chased out of restrooms by students and 
teachers. And I had ... well I should say, my parents got divorced. My mom came out as a 
lesbian when I was 7, my parents got divorced, and around the time I was or 9, I came home 
from school and I was crying because I was getting harassed so much in the bathroom and 
getting picked on at school. My mom said to me, “Well, you can grow your hair out and look like 
a girl and this will stop, or you can stay how you are and be proud of that and just realize that 
The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies 
University of Minnesota it’s going to be a little bit more difficult.” So that to me was a really amazing gift that she gave 
me and also gave me the permission ... or gave me the support at home to keep kind of going 
against the grain more publicly and at school. 
AJ: Wow, that’s fascinating on multiple levels. A, that you have that kind of support; and B, that 
bathroom and these kinds of gendered spaces was already being policed for you. 
JD: Yeah. 
AJ: I don’t think people began to experience that or at least the people that I’ve talked to don’t 
begin to experience that until sometimes later. 
JD: Well I think I became so conscious of my gender being different because it was constantly being 
reflected back at me. It’s taken me a long time to feel comfortable in restrooms and feel like I’m 
allowed to use those spaces. But yeah, it started really early for me – and I even had ... I 
remember my 5th grade teacher who, ironically, has sort of become a supporter of what I do 
now, but I vividly ... 
AJ: Is that right? You still have a relationship with your 5th grade teacher? 
JD: On Facebook. But I vividly remember her yelling at me for wearing my pants too low and not 
being lady-like and not sitting the right way. And so, yeah, it was just always kind of pushed on 
me that I was not a little girl the way you were supposed to be. 
AJ: You were not conforming to the gender norms of our culture and society. 
JD: Yeah. 
AJ: How did your classmates deal with that? 
JD: You know, in elementary school I don’t know. I had several friends. It was more often people I 
didn’t know as well who would have a problem with it. I was also still dealing with, at that time, 
just telling people that my mom was a lesbian because that was difficult in Little Rock. 
AJ: That’s a thing – yes. 
JD: I had lots of different parent configurations, so it was complicated. I think, in terms of my 
friends, that didn’t get more complicated for me until high school or until kind of puberty and 
locker rooms and that kind of thing. Yeah. But I had several good friends as a child, both male 
and female friends and none of my gender difference seemed to be a deal breaker until we all 
kind of hit puberty and then things changed a bit. But yeah, even in elementary school I always . 
. . I just never quite fit in with either kind of group of people or activity. At recess I would always 
play with the boys. 
AJ: Wow. So I think you said you didn’t stay in Arkansas the entirety of your childhood. Where did 
you guys move next? 
JD: So when I was about to turn 13, my mom and her partner at the time and I moved to Boston. 
Actually to Cambridge, we landed in Cambridge, Massachusetts. That, for me, really turned out 
to be a blessing – like a huge blessing. My parents had had several custody battles leading up to 
The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies 
University of Minnesota that move. My father had tried to get custody on the grounds that my mom was a lesbian so 
there had been a lot of turmoil leading up to that move. But we landed in Cambridge and I 
began high school when I was and that’s where I really came out and found a community and 
that was very significant. The high school I went to is called Cambridge Rindge and Latin School, 
it’s the big public school in Cambridge. 
AJ: Cambridge ... 
JD: Cambridge Rindge and Latin. 
AJ: Rindge? 
JD: It’s R-i-n-d-g-e. Cambridge Rindge and Latin School. 
AJ: OK. 
JD: And it has the oldest gay straight alliance in the country. 
AJ: Is that right? 
JD: It was started by Al Ferrara who was the photography teacher and he began the gay straight 
alliance after he had ... he was not out and he had a gay student commit suicide. In 1986, 
when that happened, he formed the gay straight alliance, so by the time I came along even 
though it was still high school, which had its difficulties, it was a pretty safe place to be. We had 
a gay straight alliance office where you could go and sit and read Dykes to Watch Out For and 
whatever else was in there and have gay straight alliance meetings. So when I was 13, I came 
out as being gay and got really involved with the gay straight alliance, I got involved with a group 
called Project East that started and sustained gay straight alliances. I did a lot of public 
speaking and advocacy work all throughout high school – both at my high school and in the 
larger Boston community. And, I found an amazing art department there. We had theatre, we 
had dance – I took dance. We had ceramics, drawing, photography. So I really found a 
community in Boston and I found kind of a safe haven in the art department at my high school. 
And I was all of a sudden ... I went from Little Rock where you have to drive everywhere, to 
Cambridge where I took the bus to school. So it was also a different kind of independence and 
autonomy. Yeah, from the time I was I was a bit more independent in terms of social groups 
and much more involved with kind of direct LGBT education. 
AJ: Awesome. I didn’t ask – do you have siblings? 
JD: I don’t. 
AJ: I mean you didn’t mention – and I think in some of the line of your answers, a sibling may have 
come up but I thought I should just clarify this. So you’re an only child. 
JD: I am. My father had two sons from a previous marriage and they lived with us when I was little 
for four years. When my parents split they went back to live with their mom. One passed away 
and the other I’m not in touch with. So, I’m really an only child. Technically I have a half-sibling 
somewhere in the world. 
The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies 
University of Minnesota AJ: Wow. So you found this community, you said you came out as gay so I’m interested in that. 
What prompted you to use that language and are you referring to gay as an overall designation 
of alternative sexual orientation or did you recognize yourself as sort of masculine identified and 
you wanted to be with other men? Is that how you’re using gay? 
JD: No. I was using it more as I was attracted to women and female-bodied individuals at the time. 
AJ: So gay as sort of an overarching ...? 
JD: Yeah. I identified as a dyke then but I sort of specifically didn’t like lesbian. 
AJ: OK. I’m so glad I probed into this a little. 
JD: Yeah. 
AJ: Go ahead – I’m sorry. 
JD: I would sort of ... so when I was I came out as being attracted to ... I’m trying to think what 
I conceived of it then. I guess just other female-identified folks. I was often attracted to 
masculine of center people, individuals – whether butch or trans or gender variant. The 
language I would use and other people would use would shift. But then I was 14-ish, I really 
began questioning my own gender identity and thinking about how that interacted with my 
sexuality. I settled on the word queer as more of an umbrella term. But earlier on, I liked the 
word dyke because I felt like it was more political. Somehow it felt like that language left room 
for me to be masculine in a way that lesbian didn’t, even though I wasn’t quite at queer yet. So 
yeah. I’m trying to think of all the good stories to tell. When I was and 15, I was dating 
someone who was and went to Northeastern and was really involved with the LGBT group 
there. And all throughout high school I went to a lot of conferences – True Spirit and 
Transcending Boundaries and the myriad of gay conferences in New England but when I was 
dating this person I was very involved in that and he was about to transition from female to 
male. I was friends with his friends and that was ... they were some of the first trans masculine 
folks I knew personally but even that felt ... it didn’t feel right. Everyone I met through him was 
very much female to male binary identified – wanted to transition, wanted to be perceived as 
male, live as male and to ... 
AJ: So sexual normative kind of ... 
JD: Yeah, just a bit more ... 
AJ: Reinforcement of the binary. 
JD: Yeah. And so even though I was exposed to the trans community, I still didn’t quite ... it didn’t 
feel quite right to me. I knew I was more masculine of center. At that time I think I was even 
more masculine presenting – I think I’ve settled into being gentler and ... I was very pent-up. 
And then I went to a conference when I was and I saw an art piece someone had made about 
accessing chest surgery without transitioning and being on hormones. As sort of cliché as it 
sounds, I had sort of this ah-ha moment where it occurred to me for the first time that I didn’t 
have to take the whole package, that I could kind of pick and choose the parts of masculinity or 
surgery that felt accurate to me. 
The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies 
University of Minnesota AJ: Sure. 
JD: So yeah, from that moment I pursued having chest surgery but not transitioning hormonally. So 
I had chest surgery when I was and really, at that point, began to fully settle into my body 
and settle into feeling comfortable in my skin. I had bound my chest for many years in high 
school and just never ... I had a lot of discomfort around dance class and gym class and just 
anything with my body. What’s interesting to me is that I was actually not so uncomfortable 
with my body when I was alone, or I dated quite a bit in high school and I never had, really, 
dysphoria with that. But publically and socially I just felt ... something felt not me about that, 
and maybe it was that the people I dated definitely treated me as masculine, kind of like re­ 
named that and so I could get past that in a safe way and I feel grateful that I had that 
experience. But it wasn’t until I had chest surgery that I really came into my own self and felt 
more comfortable. And actually kind of relaxed into the things about me that are more 
feminine or more ... these words are so ... what is feminine? The things that are perceived to 
be more feminine – more emotional, more vulnerable. Once I felt more at home in my body I 
felt like I could really express that. I’d say in the past decade I’ve really become at ease with 
being more in the middle and more gender variant and really proud of that. There were times 
right after I had had chest surgery where I was trying to figure out, you know, if I’m in a pool do I 
have to pass as male? Or if someone sees my chest then do I have to do all these other things 
that they think men do. It really took a lot of years to kind of unravel all of that and be proud of 
being female bodied, masculine presenting, having chest surgery but not transitioning. I think 
I’m at that place now but it took a while to kind of ease into that. It’s interesting now because if 
I’m in a predominantly trans masculine space, I feel very not masculine. I feel like my femininity 
is magnified and if I’m in a primarily female presenting space, I feel like my masculinity is 
magnified. So it’s kind of this constantly shifting reflection based on who I’m with and how I’m 
being perceived. And the one thing that made me think of about my childhood is while I was 
being chased out of bathrooms and being picked on for being masculine, I was actually a fairly 
sensitive child so there was this kind of complicated dynamic for me where I felt like I couldn’t 
really express that sensitivity because of this other thing going on with my gender. 
AJ: Sure. 
JD: So that’s something I think I really also fully came into as an adult, kind of once I had felt at ease 
with myself. 
AJ: So, you know, I kind of hear what you’re saying and I hear a lot of people talk about congruency 
and it sounds as if you have sort of been able to reconcile holding this sort of middle space. 
JD: Yes. 
AJ: That’s amazing. What would you say ... or what is your friendship circle like? Is there a large 
community of gender sort-of variant or gender non-conforming people that you’re in 
community with? 
JD: Yeah, I think so. It’s different now in my kind of immediate group because I moved so recently. 
But I would say over the past years I definitely have had community in Boston and Chicago 
where that was understood and where I had other close friendships with people who were also 
The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies 
University of Minnesota somewhere in the middle. Yeah. And I also think I have also kind of become comfortable being in that space in the world at large – like with people who are not ... 
AJ: Sure. 
JD: But yeah, I think definitely there is community. If anything ... there was a period of time when I was maybe to ... or maybe even younger, maybe to 25, where I was really ... my kind of primary identity was around being queer or being trans. The thing I was figuring out was my own gender and at some point that shifted and I developed community and friendships around other things as well. And so right now I feel like I am very much a part of a queer community and also a photography community. I make work about gender and sexuality and identity and I’ve decided my kind of obsessive thing that I make art about is identity and how we each come to know who we are and then how who we are affects relationships with other people and our experience in the world. That’s just the thing I keep coming back to. There was a time where the inquiry was focused only on myself and now that time for me has passed and I’m able to engage with other people and more broadly. 
AJ: And explore identity from that lens, if you will. 
JD: Yeah. 
AJ: No pun intended. I know, we met in your capacity as an artist and a photographer, talk to me about your work. What have been some of the major projects that you’ve worked on and just a little bit more about this exploration of identity and what have you learned beyond your own self exploration – like what are some key learnings that you have experienced from talking to other people about identity? 
JD: Yeah, that’s a big question. So when I was kind of ... I don’t want to say coming out, but when I was going through the process of figuring out where I fit in the world I hadn’t seen many visual representations of people who looked like me, or especially whose gender was like mine. And some of the first places that I saw that was in photography books, in books by Catherine Opie and Del LaGrace Volcano. And so as a younger person, as a teenager, I had this ... 
AJ: Della Grace? 
JD: Sorry, Del LaGrace Volcano. I can spell it. Del is an intersex photographer who made a lot of ... several books about trans and intersex and gender variant folks and I kind of found them in the lesbian/feminist book store which has since closed, unfortunately – like the rest of them. But I had this really powerful experience seeing someone who I, at least, could imagine was like me represented. And so that was part of what fueled my passion for photography. So then I went to college, I went to the Massachusetts College of Art & Design, and kind of took photography right away, just fell in love with it – hit the ground running. And that was also around the time I was having my chest surgery and so as I was learning to be a photographer I was also going through this process around my gender. I photographed that, I made self-portraits. I was part of a trans and gender variant community at the time so I started photographing my friends. That was really the beginning, for me – it’s a project I call Transcendence. It was my first body of work of trans and gender variant folks. And then over the years I’ve made other projects that focus on relationships, certain ... I have one project called Coupled that is a collection of portraits of couples who have some connection to a female identity – so I have, you know, 
female-bodied, lesbian-identified folks, I have trans masculine folks, trans feminine folks, but it 
was very much about this idea of relationship. As I’ve gone on as a photographer, my inquiry 
around gender and identity and sexuality, I feel, as gotten more complicated and deeper. And 
so in my project, Every Breath We Drew, which it just was published ... 
AJ: Yes. Thank you for gifting me that. 
JD: You’re welcome. That to me was about a more ... it was definitely made through a lens of 
gender and identity and desire and sexuality, but it was more about thinking about that theme I 
talked about – about how we each come to embody ourselves and how we are able to connect 
with other people. And also examining masculinity from different angles – so there are folks in 
the book who are trans identified, folks who are not trans identified, and I was really trying to 
get at a more broad idea about how these identities are formed. And so now the project that 
I’m working on that we met for is a project called To Survive on the Shore: Photographs and 
Interviews with Transgender and Gender Variant Older Adults. I’m working on that in 
collaboration with my partner, Vanessa. We’re traveling around the country finding people over 
50 to photograph and interview, and that, for me, is really ... it’s a project that obviously 
comes from my own interest but it feels like something more external – like I’m not looking into 
myself and examining who I am. It’s more about how can I photograph this part of my 
community in a way that provides visibility but also captures history and just allows people to 
have an understanding of what it means to be transgender. I think so much of what we see is 
youth focused that it seemed important to show a broader spectrum of the community. So 
yeah, my work has always been about identity but it kind of goes back and forth between me 
looking internally and then me looking outward, and then me looking internally and then 
outward. It’s definitely informed by who I am but each project kind of takes on a different tone. 
AJ: Sure, wow. Any key things that you have sort of uncovered along the way? Any sort of threads 
or ... ? And if it’s a challenge to sort of come up with anything, then don’t worry but I just 
would think sometimes when you train your lens on a person, it brings up some different kinds 
of information. 
JD: Yeah. I think one thing that has come to light is the more I think about and focus on and speak 
to people about gender, the more kind of malleable it seems. I feel like the deeper you look ... 
it’s kind of like an onion, you keep peeling these layers and you get to the middle of it and 
there’s nothing. I feel that way about masculinity – you keep poking at it and what is this thing? 
What does it to be masculine? How are the different ways to be masculine? And it all kind of 
unravels. And so ... but then, of course, there is that kind of theory side and then there’s the 
real world and how gender is perceived and sexuality is perceived. I’ve spent a lot of time 
thinking about the intersection of those things, kind of an internal identity and then the 
experience of living in the real world and how that manifests. I had another thought and then it 
just escaped me ... I mean, I think one thing that really holds true for me in my work is that I 
think when you really know someone it’s hard to hate them, or it’s hard to discriminate against 
them when you really know someone’s story and when you see their humanity and you can 
relate to them. Even though it’s in a photograph perhaps or through an interview. I really 
believe strongly in the power of photography to educate and to create empathy and to allow 
The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies 
University of Minnesota Jess Dugan 
someone to feel like they know someone that they don’t in real life and that they know what 
someone else has been through. I think that can be really powerful to encourage understanding 
and encourage dialogue. And the other thing, I think, is for me – I have a lot of self-portraits in 
my work, whenever I give an artist talk I talk about my own identity and sexuality and whenever 
I get to Q and A, I tell people they can ask about my work or my gender or whatever. I think 
when you share yourself in that way it kind of creates space for other people to share. I think if 
you make yourself vulnerable and try to really be truthful and intimate, I think it allows other 
people to do that in return and it creates this kind of amazing space where you have this 
interaction that you wouldn’t have otherwise. And that’s one thing I love about photography. I 
like to joke when I speak with students that if I told someone I wanted to come to their house 
and stare at them for an hour, they would never let me do it but if I say I want to make your 
photograph it allows for this moment where you really slow down and you try to get to know 
each other and you look. It facilitates this really meaningful exchange. 
AJ: Yeah, it really does. It just creates a whole different sort of dynamic. You’ve really just been 
going through and sort of answering my questions before I even ask them, which is great. 
Because yeah, I don’t even have to go down that path – I can just sit here and listen to you. I 
deeply appreciate it. Looking back over your decision to more fully express your true gender 
identity, what have been some of the challenges? 
JD: Well, I think it is difficult to kind of live in the world as someone who is more androgynous or 
gender variant. I had to make peace with the fact that the place I feel most comfortable, for me, 
is not always something that other people understand, or there’s not always an easy space for 
that in the world. So that is sort of a ... I don’t want to say constant challenge, but I regularly 
scare people in the restroom or kind of think twice about how to behave in a certain setting – 
like a gym or a locker room. It’s just constantly reflected back at me that people can’t quite 
figure me out. The body scanners at the airport, l almost always have a problem. It’s far worse 
for other people, I recognize that I’m fairly privileged in many ways but it’s just kind of a 
constant reminder of that difference. 
AJ: So what bathroom do you generally frequent? 
JD: Well now I use female restrooms. I had used male pronouns and used male restrooms and such 
for a while. But, that was ... for me that was always a way to kind of say, “I’m not female in the 
way you expect,” but I never actually internally felt male identified. So as I kind of moved 
through that kind of becoming at ease with myself, I swung back to feeling like I could use 
female spaces and present the way that I am – that there was nothing in congruence with the 
fact that I’m female bodied and that my chest is flat. To me those can go together. Of course, 
socially ... if I’m changing in a women’s locker room, I will only change my shirt if no one is 
around. And those are out of respect, I understand people get confused – they get confused 
kind of by design. I understand. So they are just little ways that I try to be mindful of it like that. 
Yeah, and then it was interesting having surgery – I had nerve surgery a few weeks ago, just kind 
of explaining things to the doctors or having them interact with my body is always a little like 
ehhh, how is this going to go? 
AJ: Are they respectful? Jess Dugan 
JD: They were pretty respectful. I had one, out of like nine or ten people I encountered, I had one 
who was uncomfortable. 
AJ: Visibly or expressly? 
JD: Visibly to me and I think this person had perceived me as male and then asked one of the other 
providers, one of the nurses, something about me using male pronouns and then was corrected 
and was then flustered and uncomfortable. I mean nothing horrible, it was sort of subtle 
discomfort. So yeah, that comes up. But I think overall I don’t have huge challenges, it’s more 
the kind of subtle social stuff. I have a partner. 
AJ: Yay. 
JD: So I’m not always navigating dating, which can be its own thing. 
AJ: How long have you guys been together? 
JD: We’ve been together a little over three years. 
AJ: How did you navigate dating prior to this relationship? 
JD: You know, I never had a huge problem finding ... 
AJ: Rico Suave. 
JD: No, finding people who were queer identified or bi-identified who kind of got my gender. I 
found that I have often ... my dating has often worked better with people who were bi-or 
queer identified, as opposed to very lesbian identified, because there was a little more freedom 
around me and my body and my expression and that just has always felt the most comfortable. 
Yeah, I do have ... I identify sexuality-wise as queer and so my attraction falls along the 
spectrum ... I’d say it swings toward ... I don’t even know. It swings toward more female side, 
whether that’s trans masculine, trans feminine, female not trans. But I do have some attraction 
to more masculine folks and that, to me, felt always not ... that to me feels more difficult. Like 
if I had ... I feel around a lot of more gay male spaces I feel very invisible as a masculine person, 
I feel very much seen as a female lesbian. So that feels invisible. And I know that’s different for 
trans men who have transitioned, but in terms of more female spaces it’s been OK. I’ve never 
felt at home in truly lesbian spaces and I’ve never felt at home in gay male spaces and there 
aren’t really bi-sexual spaces that are designated, at least in my life – maybe at a conference. 
And so I sometimes miss being in a more queer space where there is a variety of identities and 
those things are understood, but on a one-to-one level it’s been OK. I was also lucky to live in 
large urban areas where there were communities that were more queer. Yeah. 
AJ: What have been some of the positive aspects? 
JD: Everything. I feel really grateful that the visibility of my gender, from a really young age, kind of 
forced me out of the closet – and still does. I don’t ever pass as not queer or gender 
conforming, that just doesn’t happen. I think even though that was difficult at times, I feel 
grateful that that kind of forced me to embrace who I am and be comfortable with it and choose 
to be myself even when there is not an easy space for that to fit. I think that’s a real blessing Jess Dugan 
because I’ve known a lot of folks who kind of carry a lot of fear around coming out and kind of 
fully expressing themselves – for valid reasons. 
AJ: Absolutely. 
JD: I feel grateful that just because of who I am I don’t blend easily and because of that I’m just 
more comfortable and open. 
AJ: Yeah, because you’ve had a lot more time, based on what you’ve been sharing with me, a lot 
more time to really sort of process that in an open and, seemingly, supportive way. 
JD: Yeah. 
AJ: What’s your relationship like with your mom and I’m assuming she has a partner. 
JD: Yeah. So my relationship with my mom is great, we’re really close. We’ve always been really 
close and she’s always been a big supporter. She and her partner, Kris, came with me when I 
had chest surgery. 
AJ: Nice. 
JD: And just have been great – have always been super supportive of me and my gender and 
sexuality and also just my life and my work. My relationship with my dad is more difficult, it’s 
actually quite tender and sad at the moment. We haven’t spoken since the summer when my 
partner and I got married. So that’s been a harder road. He’s never really been comfortable 
with me and my gender, even though we’ve had a good relationship in other ways at various 
points. It’s just never been easy, it’s always been kind of a struggle and I think something that 
has made him uncomfortable from the time I was a kid until now. So that’s difficult but ... it is 
what it is. We’re kind of working through that at the moment but ... yeah, but my mom has 
always been very supportive. 
AJ: Are you connected with extended family? 
JD: Not a lot, I don’t have a lot of extended family. My mom’s relationship with her mother was 
severed because she was gay and my father was not ... when I was growing up his parents lived 
in Washington state and I saw them a bit, but once my parents got divorced and things kind of 
shifted, I really didn’t see them anymore. So yeah, I have an aunt – my mom has a sister who I 
know and have a good relationship with, but I don’t really have much sense of extended family. 
And as a kid I didn’t grow up with like grandparents that I was close to or aunts and uncles that I 
was close to, so yeah not much. 
AJ: OK. Chosen family? 
JD: Yeah, I have a lot of chosen family. I do. I think the challenge with me for that is we’re all over 
the country now. People that I have been really close to for a long time, we all have kind of 
scattered and so I have a lot of really close friends but we’re all kind of in different places now 
and I’m kind of rebuilding my immediate community in St. Louis where I live. But I do feel ... I 
like the larger LGBT community and, for me, the larger photography community are both, kind 
of on a national level, are places where I have a lot of community and people. The upside of my Jess Dugan 
community having kind of scattered is I can go to almost any city in the country and know 
somebody and be kind of tapped into the community there, and that’s amazing. But I think as 
we all increasingly kind of move around and maybe it’s just that I know folks in academia or in 
art careers or something like that. But as we all kind of become more connected on Facebook 
and less attached to place, it’s kind of lost that immediate sense. But yeah. 
AJ: Cool. You just got married, congratulations. 
JD: Thank you. 
AJ: What prompted you to move to St. Louis? 
JD: So ... Vanessa and I met in Chicago, we met ... we actually two-stepping at a gay country bar 
north of here called Charlie’s. 
AJ: Charlie’s. 
JD: And we met here ... I was finishing my MFA and she was finishing her Ph.D. in social work and 
she went on the job market and got a faculty position at Washington University in St. Louis. So 
we moved for that. 
AJ: For work. 
JD: Yeah, for work and for me, because I’m more flexible, I went and now I focus on my work most 
of the time, which is really great. I feel very fortunate. And then I also do some freelance 
museum work locally. So I travel for work and am building up a community ... yeah, 
community in St. Louis. 
AJ: So if I can ask, just exploring the medical interventions just a little bit further, you talked about 
the surgery. Have you considered, have you ever done hormonal therapy or other surgical 
procedures? 
JD: I had a period of time where I was really thinking if I wanted to pursue any hormones and I 
ultimately didn’t. I never did and I feel that’s not something I really question now. So I feel 
stable with that decision. So no, for me it was only chest surgery. I’ve never had an inclination 
to transition medically or socially or have any more surgeries. So I’m kind of at ease in that way. 
I do seem to keep getting tattoos. 
AJ: OK, that’s a form of body modification. 
JD: Slowly getting more tattoos. But no, I feel comfortable with the surgery and I’m not looking into 
hormones. 
AJ: Thank you for being willing to share and be open about that. You’ve sort of talked about your 
personal comfort level in relationship within the L, the G, the B and even sort of the binary T 
spaces, or trans spaces. What do you think the relationship is on a broader level, how does 
trans and gender non-conforming people existence relate within the L, the G, and the B 
community, from your perspective? JD: 	That’s a big question. You know, I think our community is at a tough point around cohesiveness and what we value. I think the needs of the trans community have been ignored in some significant ways by the mainstream, we’ll just say G and L, I don’t think you can throw B into that. So yeah, I want to be part of a community that is representative of everyone’s identity. I feel that there is a split in some of the larger gay and lesbian community versus trans community. I think that ... I worry that with some of the kind of mainstream acceptance that we’ve gotten, especially around marriage equality, and even now around kind of mainstream trans narratives, which is sort of a new idea. 
AJ: 	Yes, say more about that. After your finish your piece about what you’re concerned about, I just want to hear a little bit more of your take about mainstream trans narrative. 
JD: 	Well I worry who is being lost in this process and who is being left behind. I think as part of our G and L community moves more into the mainstream and has more mainstream acceptance, I think it becomes less urgent then for those individuals to fight for everyone else. I think that that’s a risk that we really have to be thinking about and talking about and remembering that some people do want to assimilate and kind of live the gender conforming heteronormative relationship model and other people don’t. I think we have to leave space for people who don’t, and can’t, and whose gender will never be that and whose relationship models may never be that and whose values may never be that and whose class may never be that. So yeah, I feel like it’s a moment where we really need to try to come together and work for kind of larger equality and make more room for people to be who they are and not less – not make it, “Well you can be gay if you have a white picket fence and get married, then that’s acceptable.” No, we have to really broaden our room for that and that’s also my kind of takeaway around loosening our expectations of gender and loosening our stereotypes around gender is that it doesn’t just make room for trans folks, it makes room for everyone and all kinds of people who are not part of the trans community are negatively impacted by our gender stereotypes and expectations. So for me it’s always been about making room for everyone to be who they are in the space. I hope that we, as a community, can come back to that place. But I’m not ... I think there’s a big shift happening. With the mainstream trans representation, this year has been really fascinating in terms of trans visibility because ... maybe this year and last, 2015 was kind of held up as the big year, but 2014 we had Laverne Cox and Janet Mock and Chaz Bono if you want to ... 
AJ: 	Chaz was a little prior to that but ... 
JD: 	Yeah, I wasn’t blown away but ... so we’ve had some visibility but I think 2015, especially with Caitlyn Jenner coming out and with Transparent and... 
AJ: 	Jazz Jennings getting her big reality TV show. 
JD: 	Yeah, I think that trans narratives have moved into the mainstream in a way that they never have before. I think that is a really positive development but I also think it’s really an important moment for us to think about who is being represented and who has the means and the platform to speak and what issues are being represented. I fear ... I shouldn’t say I fear, I sense that there is some friction between some of the long-time activists in the trans community who have been working for decades to get to this moment and then are not the ones being given the microphone and the platform in this moment. I just really want ... I want this visibility to 
Jess Dugan 
extend to people who are not white and upper class and gender conforming. I want it to be a 
moment where we use this new visibility to tell the stories that we need to tell and make space 
for our entire community. I think with this incredible visibility and platform comes an incredible 
responsibility and I don’t want Caitlyn Jenner to be the only trans narrative that most of America 
is familiar with because it’s just so misrepresentative of the issues that trans people face. I will 
be interested to see what happens in the next few years and what kind of narratives get added 
to the mix and how we can leverage this new visibility and this new understanding to translate 
into less hate crimes and more access to housing and more access to employment and less 
harassment, access to health care. All of those things are really critical and I think, in the best 
case scenario, we would use this moment to advocate for all those very real needs. And in the 
worst case, everyone will think that the world is great for trans people because Caitlyn Jenner 
got a cover on Vogue. So that’s the bad option because that’s obviously not the case. It will be 
interesting to see what kind of comes in the next decade. I do think a lot of social change can 
start with visibility and can start with understanding, it’s just a matter of leveraging that for the 
right kind of progress. 
AJ: Absolutely. Have you ever worked for or volunteered with any trans or GNC organizations? 
JD: I’m trying to think. 
AJ: I know you talked about your high school experience. 
JD: Not exclusively – yeah. I think that I had worked with larger LGBT groups. My personal, kind of 
speaking and advocacy, has been around trans issues and within trans communities. But I have 
not officially worked for a trans organization. 
AJ: You did your own thing. Wow. I’m just having a beautiful time sitting here talking to you, Jess. 
It’s fascinating because behind you, actually the moon was beginning to appear and now it just 
got clouded over again – so I had a little moment there. Has your transgender identity had an 
impact on your professional life? I think I know the answer to this question but just talk about 
that a little bit. 
JD: Yes and no. I think yes in that it has shaped the direction of my work. But no in that I’m ... I 
mean, I’m kind of the most ... well I shouldn’t say the most privileged, perhaps actually being 
trans masculine passing as male would be more so, but I think ... what am I trying to say? I 
think it’s fairly ... on the scale of difficulty, it’s the easiest to be in my position – to be female 
bodied, masculine presenting. I think it’s generally understood ... if not understood, it’s kind of 
... this is probably the least articulate part of my interview, but I think I feel very lucky to have 
been able to go to grad school, I’ve been able to find work, and I feel like it’s an incredible 
privilege and luxury and opportunity to be even trying to pursue a career as an artist. I think 
that by its nature, it’s not a safe career path and therefore I feel privileged to be able to give it a 
shot. So yeah. I would say yes just in the content of my work and who I am, but no I feel very 
lucky in that regard. I feel like it’s important for me to do what I can to advocate for folks who 
are not as lucky as me. AJ: So I would be remiss if we didn’t acknowledge that we’re in Chicago because of the National 
Gay, Lesbian, Bi-Sexual, Transgender Task Force Conference called Creating Change. What has 
been the highlight of your conference so far? 
JD: Well, I think it’s been amazing just to be around so many people who are committed to social 
justice and activism. In my daily life I ... what am I trying to say? I believe so strongly that 
activism is important and can change the world and I believe that my work is important in that 
way and I believe that other kinds of direct activism are really important, but I think sometimes 
it gets hard to kind of sustain that ... what am I trying to say? I was at a moment where I kind 
of needed to re-fuel a little bit. I feel like I’ve been putting a lot out there and ... 
AJ: Sustain that passion. 
JD: Yeah, and just kind of reconnect with community. And so, for me, that’s been the most 
powerful – just to really be tapped into community and be deeply reminded of how important it 
is to keep pursuing change and working for that. And also in terms of the project I’m working 
on, it’s been amazing because there are several people here who I had photographed that I 
didn’t know were coming, so I got to see them. And then I’ve reconnected with people like you, 
who I had photographed but now photographed again and get to spend more time with. 
AJ: Yay. 
JD: And also I’ve just met lots of new folks who I hope to include in the project. So yeah, it’s just 
been really inspiring and kind of like a community re-charge moment for me, which has been 
nice. 
AJ: Fifty years from now what is the state of the transgender, non-conforming community? 
JD: Wow, years. It’s hard to even quantify because I think I see ... I see change coming so 
quickly in some ways. And also looking backwards, I see how much progress we’ve made. We 
had an exercise in the workshop I was in yesterday. At the end – the workshop was all about 
elder LGBT communities and building ally ship and story-telling, and we had an exercise at the 
end to call someone up and thank them for something or tell them something we appreciate. 
And Jude Patton, who I had photographed, who is 75 – he transitioned years ago. He was in 
the workshop and so I called him up and started to thank him for welcoming me into his home 
and sharing his story with me and I couldn’t even keep it together. I just started crying. Really 
what I wanted to thank him for, which I barely squeaked out between tears, was paving the 
road for me to be this person. I think there were a lot of people, like Jude, who came before me 
who made it even safe for me to come out in high school and identify as gender variant and 
have a community. And then the flipside is, when I go to universities and I speak to 19-year-old 
students, their understanding of gender is so much further along than mine was and they’re 
making space for things in a whole new way. I recognize that that’s just in this academic bubble, 
but yeah I think I can already see in a decade how much progress has been made. I hope we can 
get to a point where people are free to express their gender in whatever way feels authentic 
without that having any negative affect on their life or employment or safety or access to health 
care or any of these things – which I think now, obviously, still does in a kind of profound way 
for a lot of folks. So yeah, I would love to be in a place where everyone could be themselves and 
The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies 
University of Minnesota Jess Dugan 
where we keep working toward ... I mean, if we want to go down that rabbit hole, we also have 
to talk about race equality and class equality and all of these other factors that intersect so 
strongly with our community. But I would just love to just be in a place where everybody had 
what they needed and could be who they are and could live happily – no matter what their 
gender is or where they come from. 
AJ: Jess, it’s been a fascinating hour and minutes talking to you. Thank you so much for this 
opportunity and for your willingness and our generosity. Peace. 
JD: You’re welcome. Thanks for talking to me. 