Ash Farah 
Narrator 
Andrea Jenkins 
Interviewer 
Andrea Jenkins -AJ 
Ash Farah -AF 
AJ: So, hello. My name is Andrea Jenkins. I am the oral historian for the Transgender Oral History 
Project at the Tretter Collection at the University of Minnesota Libraries. Today is June 1, 2017. 
I am in south Minneapolis and today I am chilling with Ash Farah. 
AF: You got it. 
AJ: Is that the right way? 
AF: Yes. 
AJ: All right, Ash Farah. 
AF: I mean, I won’t make you roll your r’s because we’d be here all day. 
AJ: OK. Farah. 
AF: Yes. 
AJ: Hey, Ash, how are you? 
AF: I’m good, how about you? 
AJ: I’m doing pretty good. It’s been kind of a long day, but I’m so glad that I’m here with you this 
evening. I appreciate you being willing to participate in this project. So, Ash, let me ask you to 
state your name, spell your name so we make sure we have it all spelled right, tell me your 
gender as you define it today and your gender assigned at birth, and the pronouns that you like 
to use. 
AF: So, my name is Ash Farah. It is spelled A-s-h F-a-r-a-h. I use he/him pronouns and the way I see 
my gender identity is that I’m a trans man. I exist in the world as a man, to be otherwise is a lie 
to me – it really is. 
AJ: Wow. 
AF: But, the title is about my history so I put trans in front of it. As for my gender assigned at birth, 
it was a little bit complicated because I happen to have an intersex condition when I was born, 
with my gonads, at least. That was surgically enhanced and everything else checked out for the 
female box, so they were like, “Hey, why not?” The doctor played God a little bit and clicked the 
box and that’s how I’ve lived and been conditioned since I was little. 
AJ: Wow. Yeah, no – that’s a real thing. 
AF: The butchering of intersex babies. 
AJ: Yeah. So, where were you born? 
AF: I was born in the middle part of East Africa, which is the way my nana used to put it. Since 
colonial lines were bullshit, to be quite honest ... AJ: Colonial lines, true – yes. 
AF: They divide families. 
AJ: They’re artificial. 
AF: Yes, they divide families, they’re not even built along rivers – no physical things, just based upon 
what some old white guy wanted to buy. So, I was born in the border lands of Kenya and 
Somalia in a small village there, a small farming village there actually. So, yeah. 
AJ: Do you identify as an immigrant. 
AF: Yeah, for the ... literally, I just got citizenship last year. 
AJ: Oh, wow – congratulations. 
AF: Something a lot of people don’t know about the whole immigration process here – it isn’t three 
days under express and you’ve got your citizenship papers. 
AJ: Yeah, not like getting a new driver’s license, right? 
AF: Right. It’s actually more complicated. You have to get vetted. I was a toddler when I came 
here, quite frankly. It was 2002, we arrived in New York, post 9/11 which was difficult, to say 
the least, for a new immigrant family. 
AJ: Oh, wow ... wow. 
AF: That’s probably why I speak so damn fast to begin with. But, the only reason we got our visas 
was because my grandfather knew Italian and was a translator and we came from a certain 
amount of privilege. The reasons why our names didn’t get vetted wrong was because we could 
talk and advocate for ourselves. 
AJ: You could communicate, right. 
AF: Yeah, a lot of people were left to die in these refugee camps and a lot of them grew up with me 
and I was friends with them and all these things. 
AJ: Wow. So, you have only lived in post-9/11 America. 
AF: That’s all I ever knew. I used to think that the older people in my family were crazy to be like, 
“Oh, there was a time people could go and fly into the United States, fly back, bring gifts.” 
AJ: Right. 
AF: It was a lot more relaxed and laid back. 
AJ: Yeah. 
AF: They had this idea that America was this very wealthy but welcoming place. 
AJ: What’s it like in your experience now? 
AF: It ain’t got any gold roads and Lady Liberty is a lie to me. 
The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies 
University of Minnesota AJ: There are no gold paved roads and Lady Liberty is a lie. Why do you say that? 
AF: Because of all the experiences I’ve had from the minute I got here. The church where we were staying at, there was protestors. When I entered 1st grade and kindergarten, I was immediately called Towel Head, and ever since then I’ve had to basically defend my existence and my right to be here – as an American, as a human being in this country, almost every single day. And to wake up when you’re and you just got your citizenship papers, you think you’re going to be valued as a human being finally, to turn around and read that there is a Muslim ban ... on your phone. So, that’s a little bit jaded and nihilistic, but at the same time, it’s called for. 
AJ: The struggle is real, real, real, real, real. 
AF: Right. I’ve been praying – like, “Uncle Sam, just give me one thing to be like this was the America my nana thought about when she was dying in her bed and telling me it was going to be better here. Just one thing; I just want one thing.” 
AJ: But, you worked it out and you are a U.S. citizen now, so you can’t be deported. 
AF: I can’t. 
AJ: Do you feel like you can travel back and forth? 
AF: That’s the thing. It will be difficult because no fly lists are a thing and my last name, Farah, is really common. It means happy actually, and Ash ... . 
AJ: Really? OK. And Ash? 
AF: It means life – so life happiness. I brought none of that. 
AJ: How did you come to your name? 
AF: So, it was a variation on my birth name, my birth name being Asha, of course. And, that meant life or living, and Ash actually came ... in English it means the opposite, it’s like what happens after you live. 
AJ: Right, ashes to ashes. 
AF: Right. But, I found a Kenyan translation of the name to mean the same thing – life, a tree and things that are living. I was like, “I like that more.” I like the little dichotomy of both – somehow here it means death and there it means life. 
AJ: Wow. So, always sort of straddling this sort of duality, right? 
AF: Yeah. 
AJ: Interesting. So, you were in kindergarten and they were calling you Towel Head. 
AF: Yeah. 
AJ: That’s awful. Where did you go to school, Ash? 
AF: I went to school in various places. The first school I went to, of course, was in New York. I don’t even remember the name. AJ: So, you lived in New York City? 
AF: Yeah. 
AJ: It doesn’t matter the name – PS-something, right? 
AF: It’s always Lincoln or something. 
AJ: Washington, yeah. 
AF: Named after somebody that killed my people. 
AJ: That’s real. Speak. 
AF: So, yeah, that was just so difficult. 
AJ: So, New York City – is this where this was happening at, in New York? 
AF: Yeah. We were so fed up with the state of affairs in New York and how high the rent was and 
how my mom was struggling and all these things, that we actually went back. 
AJ: Really? 
AF: We went back to the war zone, guilt ridden ... 
AJ: Because it was so hard in New York City? 
AF: It was so bigoted and intolerant in New York City. 
AJ: Wow. You’d rather live in a refuge ... I mean, your family – because you didn’t really have a 
choice? 
AF: Yeah, I was Shorty – I didn’t know any better. 
AJ: But, your parents were like, “Man, we’d rather be in a concentration ...” I mean, not a 
concentration camp but a refugee camp, which is ... I mean, you’re sort of under surveillance 
and ... 
AF: No privacy ... 
AJ: No privacy, yeah – wow. 
AF: So, we went back for a little bit and, of course, we kept hearing about these humanitarians 
coming up and talking about sanctuary cities and stuff like that and places that were coming up, 
particularly, were Sweden, Minnesota and ... 
AJ: Really? 
AF: I’m serious. And, all these places to the point that even ... 
AJ: So, super, super white, white places. 
AF: Yes. And this is the part they didn’t warn nobody about. 
AJ: With a lot of snow. AF: With a lot of snow. So, basically, my grandma went first, of course – it’s more expensive to send 
everybody. She was like, “Well, first I’ll go and see how it is,” and when she came back she 
basically told us in the form of stories, because we didn’t understand as little kids, like how 
Minnesota really was. All she would talk about was the immense amount of water she saw 
everywhere – to the point where I thought this was going to be like Cirque du Soleil met 
Valleyfair waterfalls. 
AJ: Don’t go chasing waterfalls. 
AF: But, seriously, I just thought it was going to be this giant waterfall and water was always a 
scarcity – like a thing I valued there. It’s all green and there’s funny sounding white people who 
pronounce everything with extra O’s. 
AJ: Minnesoota. 
AF: And they all look different, there’s all these different groups of people – like I’ve never met this 
kind of group. She was trying to describe Native Americans and there was no frame of 
reference, so she was like, “They’re not whites but they’re ... not white.” So, that was 
interesting. 
AJ: And the family said let’s go, huh. 
AF: “Let’s go, let’s try this out.” Nice white people ... it was the same as chasing gold under a pot . . 
. like a rainbow. So, we came and we were invited into the Catholic Church that was doing 
outreach which, thank God that they were doing it, but at the same time there were some 
issues. 
AJ: Yeah, it had its challenges. 
AF: So, we met a worker named Julie who basically taught us kids how to assimilate really well. 
Unfortunately, I, out of the siblings in my family and all that, couldn’t really assimilate because I 
couldn’t speak. So, that posed its own issues on top of ... 
AJ: So, you had ... 
AF: No, I was mutant until the age of seven. 
AJ: My question was going to be you had some physical issues with being able to speak. 
AF: Yeah, I just physically could not do it. 
AJ: Really? 
AF: I could mumble and try making fairly audible sounds until the age of years old. 
AJ: Did you understand what was happening around you? 
AF: That was the interesting part. People always assume that you’re ... that there’s retardation 
somehow or I’m deaf and they would treat me differently, like I wasn’t there. For most of my 
life, people assumed I wasn’t there so they felt free to be their most vile, their most disgusting – 
to have a grown adult staring at me and not think I was intelligent to the point that, to this day, 
The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies 
University of Minnesota despite all the IQ tests and highest honors and all this nonsense, still do not believe that I am good enough because I wasn’t a human for seven years. 
AJ: 	In their eyes, yeah. 
AF: 	Yeah. 
AJ: 	Hmm, wow. That’s a big challenge, Ash. So, you came here to Minnesota, you really had a challenge assimilating because of this speech problem/challenge. 
AF: 	Right. 
AJ: 	But then, you were able to speak. 
AF: 	Yeah, through a lot of ... there was a lot of therapy and voice therapy where the lady would do various odd tactics that I highly doubt that they do anymore – with pencils and your fingers to try to get you to speak. 
AJ: 	Oh, wow. 
AF: 	Yeah, like literally twist until you say something, or mutter something, or try. 
AJ: 	Really? 
AF: 	So, I learned English by fire basically. 
AJ: 	Wow. 
AF: 	Yeah. 
AJ: 	And so, all of this time, you had this intersex condition that was sort of ... I’m doing air quote, 
“corrected at birth,” how did you feel? 
AF: 	How did I feel about it? I didn’t know until ... 
AJ: 	You didn’t know, but how did you feel ... did you feel like you were a boy? I’m pretty sure you 
were being socialized like a girl. 
AF: 	Oh, my God, to the point where when I was ... 
AJ: 	Because your family is Muslim, right? 
AF: 	Yeah, they’re Muslim, so they raised me like the most gendered way possible – women are 
supposed to do this and this and this. 
AJ: 	So, you wore a hijab. 
AF: 	Yeah, they made me do the whole nine yards. When I was years old, the most distinct memory of this I have was up until then it’s fine for kids to cross gender play and do all this, because they’re under 5, they don’t even have a brain yet basically. So, my dad came up to me and was like, “What are you doing?” I’m like, “Riding my bike.” I had this bright red bike, I loved this bike, and he was like, “No, boys do that.” Everything I would do that day he would say, “No, boys do that,” “Boys do that.” I was obsessed with Bill Nye ... 
AJ: The science guy. 
AF: Yeah, which is probably why I’m such a geek now. He was like, “No, that’s basically the study of 
math and science and stuff like that, that’s for men.” And he would see all the doctors on TV 
and he would literally flip through American TV to prove this to me. 
AJ: Right, and if you do that it pretty much shows you that all doctors are male, because that’s the 
images that get produced. 
AF: So, my little brain is like ... well, I don’t know what this maleness is. 
AJ: And they were white males, right. 
AF: Right. So, not only could I have that side of me be derailed – I was derailed for being Muslim, I 
was humiliated for having voice issues, I was lied to about my gender identity, and on top of 
that, here, this person that I think is my father figure and the best person in the world to me, 
everything I love points me to this abstract concept of maleness that I didn’t have any concept 
of because I just did whatever I wanted. I lived in my mind, it didn’t matter. 
AJ: Yeah, and at five ... gender is not really a construct that year olds really fully comprehend. 
AF: Right, so I tricked him and eventually when he started handing me Barbies and don’t play with 
Legos and stuff like that, I was like, “Well, I guess the boy thing is pretty good too. I’m a boy 
now,” and decided to be a boy. I was like, “Hey, if all the things that I love match this idea of 
gender, then I guess that’s what I am.” I’m like, “OK, I never thought otherwise – like I never 
really fit into any of the boxes for female that they wanted me to.” 
AJ: How did people respond to that? 
AF: Oh, they flipped. You could hear a pin drop in that living room when I said that. God. Oh, my 
God. And, it took a good minute to say it too because I had to sign and basically tell them 
somehow – like it was Barbie girl, Lego boy, trying to explain it in the littlest way. I just ... this 
took minutes for him to realize that I was like, “Fuck you,” essentially. 
AJ: Right, exactly. “I’m a boy.” 
AF: Yeah. “I’m a boy, it’s fine, it’s fine.” But, I have to convey it to the adults and once they finally 
got it, they flipped to say the least. My dad basically told me I’m not raising no fags, pulled me 
by the ear, took me outside – paraded me basically to discipline me somehow. 
AJ: Wow. 
AF: Yeah, I was like, “I’m never going to have to deal with this again, hopefully.” And, birth mom, of 
course, defended me. At that time, she was like, “What are you doing with my child?” When he 
eventually left because, in my culture, they believe in curses and stuff like that – they believed 
that I was a cursed child – the reason why I couldn’t speak, the reason why I liked such odd 
things, why I was always such a burden, I wouldn’t listen to them. 
AJ: And your genitals were ambiguous, at best, right. 
The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies 
University of Minnesota Ash Farah 
AF: Right, symbol of the devil – all these things. So, they were like, “Well, this child is obviously 
cursed, I’m going to go marry another woman. Good luck with you and your three kids in the 
middle of God damn nowhere with white Minnesotans that pronounce their O’s weird.” And he 
left. 
AJ: So, he bounced. 
AF: 2007. Of course, I started getting better around the same time, which my mom thought, “Oh, a 
blessing.” And people came around and were like, “Hey, maybe, it was on him – maybe the 
curse was on him and it was his issue.” It probably was a good thing for my mom, but for me it 
meant that I could express myself more and with the expression it created way more issues for 
me – like a Pandora’s box of issues because I did not agree with the Quran, I did not like it, I did 
not like going to Sunday School, I did not like the forced box of female that I was in so I would be 
the most tomboy person you’ve ever seen and the hijab was always askew. 
AJ: (laughing) I’m sorry. 
AF: It’s true. I was wearing jeans that were always dirty and ripped and torn. 
AJ: Sneakers. 
AF: Right, so messed up. 
AJ: Were you sagging? 
AF: I wish I was sagging. 
AJ: Oh, my goodness. Did you get teased at school? 
AF: Oh, constantly. I barely had ... like I had two friends throughout the span of elementary here in 
Minneapolis. It was brutal. The only way I could find friends was through the intelligence I had 
because of all those years of people ignoring my existence and me being obsessed with books. 
So, I’d sell my homework and in return, “Hey, play with me at recess,” or something like that. It 
was really depressing and sad because all the interactions I’ve had with humans was basically a 
zero sum, “Give me this, give me that,” sort of deal. Yeah. 
AJ: When did you ... 
AF: There’s a lot. 
AJ: Right, I know. I’m getting tongue-tied here a little bit. But, you already kind of said you sort of 
figured out your gender identity when you were like five. Right? 
AF: Right. 
AJ: But when did you really begin to express yourself as ...? 
AF: Right around 5th grade and 5th grade was a difficult time for me because they made me skip 4th 
grade because I was excelling when I started to learn to speak. 
AJ: You really caught up fast. AF: They were like, “You were smart the whole time.” I was like, “Yeah.” They skipped 5th grade – they made me skip 5th grade. They put my 4th grade ass into a middle school, a hormonal-filled festival that I had no concept of and ... 
AJ: Which is the hardest time in kid’s ... 5th and 6th graders are just really mean to each other – and 7th graders. 
AF: They’re just brutal. So, basically, it was the first time I ever heard the word faggot actually expressed, because kids aren’t supposed to curse, and all these things. I was like, “All right, I’m no fag,” which is weird because to have internalized homophobia, have me express my gender finally, is such a weird thing to describe because I was like, “All right, if you’re a guy and you are dressed in pink and wearing dresses and wearing hijabs, what the fuck does that make you?” 
AJ: Right. 
AF: Right. I was like ... and then, the words of my dad kept echoing in my head, “I’m not raising no fag,” and stuff like that. So, I’m like, “All right, then I’m not going to be like that, I’m going to wear jeans and I’m going to be masculine-ish.” It failed, because I’m a geek. 
AJ: Well, there are geeky guys that exist in the world too. 
AF: I didn’t understand anything past the binary though. 
AJ: Right, there you go. 
AF: So, around then I was like, “All right, I’m going to cut my hair, I’m going to do what I need to do, I’m going to show it.” Which was like a pariah – like to the point where birth mom was already struggling with the fact of being a Black single woman in Minneapolis raising three kids. 
AJ: Are your siblings younger or older? 
AF: Oh, they’re younger. The other ones were from a ... 
AJ: So, you’re the oldest. 
AF: Yeah, the other ones were from a past marriage and are unrelated to me. 
AJ: OK. 
AF: So, yeah. 
AJ: You were kind of talking about going to middle school, 5th grade. 
AF: Right, so I just really started expressing, “Hey, I’m a dude, I’m fine with this, this is how I am.” But then, of course, puberty is like, “Well, psych, you’re not going to be a full girl, but you ain’t going to be no dude.” 
AJ: Right, wow. 
AF: I had gotten my period really late, if I got it ... it was not like a real one, basically. And, didn’t really develop fully because I had CAH, which is an intersex condition based solely on hormones. 
AJ: What is it called? AF: CAH, so C-A-H. C-A-H, yes. 
AJ: CAH, so what does that mean? 
AF: Congenital Adrenal – something. I should know it by now. 
AJ: But what does it do? 
AF: Basically, it affects your gonads and your levels of hormones inside your body and, in puberty 
and development, it typically makes people have ... almost show symptoms of PCOS, almost. 
AJ: 	I don’t know what PCOS is either. So, I’m unintelligent around this issue. 
AF: 	Oh, it’s fine. I wish I was a doctor on this. PCOS is Polycystic Ovary Syndrome – something along 
those lines where your ovaries are overproducing hormones. 
AJ: 	Oh, wow. 
AF: 	Right. And, in the case of CAH, it’s your adrenals that are overworking themselves-or under. It 
depends on which way ... 
AJ: 	So, you were having lots of estrogen or not enough? 
AF: 	Not enough, to the point where I was masculinized but still feminine because, of course, there’s going to be some – I’m not fully XY, that’s not how I am. It wasn’t a classic intersex syndrome where XXY, like Klinefelters, for example. It wasn’t like that, that’s why the only external way that I’ve ever found out would probably be through birth if they hadn’t corrected me. So, that was going on, so I wasn’t pretty enough to be a girl. I wasn’t a woman, and there’s all these milestones that you have to hit to be a woman, of course – because, binary. I certainly wasn’t a boy because I was 4’11” and barely 100 pounds. So, I looked forever like this Peter Pan, no genderist character of a human, and I would just get teased from both sides endlessly no matter how much I tried to fit myself into one mold or the other, it wasn’t going to work. 
AJ: 	Wow. Man, Ash, you are a fighter. 
AF: 	Right, God. 
AJ: 	Because now you get mad respect, you get mad love from the community – or is that true? 
AF: 	I’m so glad I met the queer community. 
AJ: 	I mean, is that ... maybe I’m just projecting onto you. Is that a reality for you? 
AF: 	So, of course middle school was hard and birth mom ultimately does not accept my gender identity and goes through various exorcisms, pray away the gay, and that fails and I run away and she kicks me out ultimately and all this stuff. I stumble upon this little café or whatever on 35th and Chicago. 
AJ: 	Oh, really? 
AF: 	It was right by the gym/school – online gym building that I knew and I was like, “OK, there’s a little café there, I can ask for extra food or something.” So, I walk in and I immediately see 
Ash Farah 
queer things and I’m like, “All right, this is the thing my mom told me not to do.” And, of course, 
I have a lot of guilt and so I’m really awkward and shy and I’m sitting and I can’t even order a 
fucking croissant because I’m so ... 
AJ: Uncomfortable. 
AF: Ann is behind the register, “Hey, kid, do you want anything?” And I’m like, “Do you have any 
extra food?” They were like, “There’s a food shelf down there in the Exchange ...” And 
explaining basically the set-up. 
AJ: All the resources. 
AF: Yeah, of Minnesota Trans Health Coalition. And, Rox is like, “What’s wrong?” – eventually, 
because I was tired, ragged, I probably smelled like death. 
AJ: So, you were at Café SouthSide. 
AF: Yeah, it was luck. I don’t know what it was, but I’m so glad ... 
AJ: Which is sort of the de facto queer person of color community center. 
AF: Place to be. 
AJ: That’s kind of the queer trans community center. 
AF: It’s the only café that is run by and for queer people of color, has health resources right next 
door to it and a food shelf and youth programs and all these things, but I didn’t know none of 
that. I was just walking into some café. 
AJ: Right. 
AF: Rox sat me down and I talked about the stories that I went through, blah, blah, blah – birth mom 
is horrible probably because I’m a faggot and they were like, “No, that’s not how things go, we 
can take you to the Bridge and there’s all these resources.” If they hadn’t done that, what I was 
basically planning to do to make money was selling drugs and partying and doing all these illicit 
hustling ... basically hustle to get money. 
AJ: Right, you’ve got to eat – people have got to eat. 
AF: And they showed me there was another way. In that way, I’m lucky because I had a positive first 
queer experience. A lot of the POC queer people that I’ve met have not had that, they’ve been 
encountered with organizations that are run by cis gender white gay men who either do not 
understand their identity or outright disrespect it. They don’t get the resources they need and 
ultimately feel like they can’t and will never trust resources like that again. They were put in the 
cycle and it’s just really sad. 
AJ: So, wow, you had this amazing sort of first experience to walk into Café SouthSide. I know 
Roxanne and Anna and they are both amazing human beings – very, very adamant and 
committed to their support for queer and trans youth of color, which you clearly are. 
AF: Yay. AJ: So, man, so what’s life like for you now? You’re a U.S. citizen ... where do you work? 
AF: Oh, let’s start there. So, right now, I’m leaving Seward Coop because of a lot of issues. 
AJ: The Friendship Store? 
AF: No, the Franklin one – the big one. 
AJ: OK, so you were from Franklin – Seward Coop. 
AF: So, I’m leaving there. I’m starting an internship at OutFront to do basically the work ... to extend the work I was doing in the Minneapolis Public Schools with educating educators and voting rights and registering and all these things. 
AJ: Oh, wait a minute. We’re going to get back to the OutFront Minnesota because we’ve got all this experience, but you did some amazing organizing at South High. 
AF: Right. So, I started at the beginning of the year, at the beginning of senior year quite frankly, to be like, “Hey, I’m always getting hit – little gaybies coming up to me and complaining about certain teachers, certain behaviors, the fact that the gender-neutral bathroom we fought so hard for to create, a multi-stall gender neutral bathroom in a public school ...” 
AJ: So, you were a part of that effort to create that. 
AF: Yeah. 
AJ: Oh, my goodness – wow. 
AF: To a degree, but I wasn’t the lead person at that time because I had a lot of guilt and I was struggling with homelessness at the time. 
AJ: Yeah, that’s real. 
AF: I did what I could, but ultimately, they noticed a lot of closing down the bathrooms and teachers not respecting their identity, not using the correct pronouns, kids just being upset with their interactions with administration and all these things. But, I just could not keep doing it on a one-by-one case process because, honestly, I wasn’t being paid enough to be Minneapolis’ ... or South High’s point person for it. 
AJ: Right. And when you say not enough, you weren’t being paid at all, right? 
AF: Whatsoever. So, I though, OK, we have this group of kids that are young, they want to help, they’re part of this GSA, why don’t we just utilize the resources we already have and know, within each other, to create four-part workshop series for teachers to attend to learn about our community, prevent instances of kids being called out on their gender identity, kids being outed to their parents and left on the streets the day after and things of this nature. But, we first needed to prove that there was a need because often times we get hit with the, “Well, trans kids only make up 1% of the population,” – whatever bullshit statistic they come up with. 
AJ: True. 
AF: Even the part in the sense of where are you getting these numbers. Anyway ... Ash Farah 
AJ: Because we’ve been doing our own research. 
AF: Right, and that’s not the case – there’s a lot of kids that aren’t out. And, for the very reason that 
they’re being denied things. I needed to prove to the administration that there was a need, so 
we partnered up with HECUA which is a film project, social justice oriented club at the U of M 
and we were like, “Hey, we want you guys to ...” 
AJ: Higher Education ... 
AF: I don’t know, it’s something awesome. 
AJ: Consortium ... 
AF: Almost there. 
AJ: HECUA ... H-E-C-U ... universities and ... association? I don’t know. 
AF: Something funny like that. 
AJ: HECUA. 
AF: And, we partnered up with them because some of them were South alums and we were like, 
“Hey, we want you to create a film based around a survey we’re going to conduct in our school 
and we want to post these results and we’re going to have an auditorium to prove the need of 
our community to the school.” Honestly, it was absolutely horrid, the results we got. We did 
randomized classrooms and randomly approached kids on purpose, and the percentages of 
questions like, “Do you believe being transgender is a choice?” “Do you think it’s OK to out 
someone?” And these are just students and the results were horrible. “Do you agree with the 
need for a gender-neutral bathroom?” and all these things. Basically, the comments were the 
ones that were even more horrid towards us. We immediately knew that there was a need and 
when we showed the video, teachers were coming up to us like, “What do we do? We don’t 
know.” We approached the principal like, “Hey, we want to do a staff meeting. You guys have 
those boring staff meetings every morning, you all talk about the same wait time or some boring 
teacher technique that they’ve heard a million times, why don’t you just let us do a quick 
presentation?” And, we got the results back from the teachers that were almost identical 
except, of course, they’re not being adults – they’re not going to outright tell a kid, “Oh, yeah, 
I’m totally fine with you being abused in the hallways.” But things like, “Do I feel in control of 
my classroom with issues of gender identity and transphobia and homophobia?” 
AJ: Right. 
AF: The results were 1-2-3 and, of course, this is a 5-point scale, but that is absolutely horrid to have 
one in four teachers know absolutely no idea what to do or how to intervene when these 
instances happen in their classroom. And, we convinced, with the help of our awesome advisor, 
in finessing the school district to basically give teachers credit, like professional development 
credits, to attend workshops led by us. 
AJ: Wow. Who is your advisor? 
AF: Oh, Sarah Minette, who also happens to be the Guitar/Music point person at our school. AJ: Oh, wow. 
AF: Yeah. 
AJ: Minette? M-o-n-e-t. 
AF: M-i-n-e-t-t-e. 
AJ: Oh, OK. So, she kind of helped kind of guide the group to some extent? 
AF: No. She is super a fan of having the laid-back advisor position because, of course, every school 
group... 
AJ: 	So, she was more of a liaison between the group and staff. 
AF: 	Yeah, basically. We interacted with staff themselves, but administration was just too much of an issue, too much of a disrespect issue because there’s not enough understanding that, as a student, I have a voice, we have merit, what we say is true and all these things. So, we basically told Ms. Minette all the things we wanted, she wrote it down, we explained and she did the talking to administration. But, we made all the workshops, we set the dates up, we presented every single one. We had times from literally 6am to because we knew some teachers weren’t going to come in the afternoons or during school. 
AJ: 	Wow. 
AF: 	This was serious because we had three different workshops and one was targeted toward sexual orientation, because that’s still an issue – it’s real, not a lot of people know about it because 
they think it’s all good because gay marriage got passed. 
AJ: 	Right, exactly. Yeah. 
AF: 	Now gay marriage did the Obama effect in the queer community. 
AJ: 	Wow, right. Yeah. 
AF: 	It’s true – racism is dead because of Obama; homophobia is not a thing because of gay marriage. 
AJ: 	Yeah, it’s real. 
AF: 	And the second one was, “Break the Binary,” which focused on supporting and creating a safe environment for gender non-conforming students in general. And the last one is, “It’s Not a Phase Mom: How to Deal with Parents and Parental Guardians and all the Issues Related to Family Rejection with LGBT Kids.” 
AJ: 	Wow, that is incredible. 
AF: 	So, we gave them strategies and ways to actually ... 
AJ: 	Do you still have ownership of this curriculum? 
AF: 	We still have ownership of this curriculum. 
AJ: 	I mean, I know you sort of know it, but ... 
Ash Farah 
AF: By memory. I created it, quite frankly. 
AJ: Wow, that’s deeply admirable. Have you gotten any recognition for this work at all? 
AF: Ed Graff, whois the superintendent of Minneapolis Public Schools, sent a letter to me specifically 
thanking me for the work I’ve done with LGBT people at my school. 
AJ: Wow. 
AF: The HECUA presentation I did led me to ultimately win the Leadership ... what was it called? It 
was called something funny – it wasn’t just a leadership award, it was like Leadership Beyond. 
Basically, out of the senior class who deserved to have recognition as a leader in the school. So, 
I got that. 
AJ: Congratulations. And you just graduated? 
AF: Yeah, like a day ago. This is the most intense go, go, go. 
AJ: You graduated yesterday? 
AF: Yeah, and my graduation – like the ceremony itself is this Saturday. 
AJ: Is that right? 
AF: Like in two days. 
AJ: Oh, my goodness, Ash. I’m giving you an air hug right now ... air hug. Congratulations. Yeah, 
because of all of the challenges that you have ... I don’t want to say overcome but you have 
certainly worked through – and, you seem so joyous. 
AF: Well, there’s no way to be because ... I don’t know. It’s kind of ... I consider myself so lucky. If 
any one thing went wrong in my life, I could end up with a completely different route. I 
wouldn’t be graduating with highest honors, I wouldn’t be recognized as a leader, I wouldn’t 
have more improvements in my life because, quite honestly, trans kids and LGBT kids in general 
are two times as likely to graduate high school let alone continue off to college and have it fully 
paid because of their leadership work. 
AJ: And/or get a job and then get an internship so ... you’ve got a job. 
AF: Or get out of homelessness. 
AJ: How did that work? Were you ... and I want to talk about the homelessness issue too, but ... 
were you out at the coop? 
AF: Oh, yeah. I think the time that I stopped being out at work was working one odd shift, but ever 
since 2013, any job I’ve had I’ve been out fully. 
AJ: Really? 
AF: It’s always an interesting encounter. 
AJ: And you get hired? You don’t have problems getting the job? AF: Because, quite frankly, I target ... 
AJ: You’re very smart. 
AF: I target when there’s places that high turnover or really need the workers to overlook a lot of stuff. 
AJ: That’s smart – that’s a smart strategy. 
AF: And honestly, I just needed a job. I just needed something to get me through, something to pay the rent. 
AJ: Because you were dealing with homelessness and you said ... so, how did you overcome that? Or, was ... 
AF: It was an issue. 
AJ: Was Café SouthSide sort of helpful in helping you find ...? 
AF: Totally. Basically, they found emergency placement for me, they found a Bridge shelter, which I went to and stayed for a good minute – a good minute. After I got, ultimately, sick of that, they helped me find a lovely queer couple in Powderhorn to take me in for a little bit. When, ultimately, that didn’t work, I found another place through, just connections, and they found a way to make it legal because the legality was the ultimate issue. 
AJ: And, so now you’re part of the Host Home Project. 
AF: The Host Home Project is run by Avenues for Homeless Youth, they’re an organization that’s been around for years. 
AJ: Yeah, they’ve been around a long time. 
AF: And, they have a branch for LGBTQ kids, in particular. I had an issue with the state’s ... because CPS was eventually involved because of the exorcisms and getting them off of me, essentially. I needed ... 
AJ: So, these were real exorcisms. You weren’t just saying this as a ... 
AF: No, this ain’t no pray away the gay, Fr. Finnigan telling you you were wrong, this is you having a blanket over your head and water being thrown down your throat. 
AJ: Oh, my goodness. 
AF: To make you think you’re drowning but you’re not. I don’t want to make this super depressing ... 
AJ: So, like waterboarding. Yeah, wow. So, but you were, “I’m out, I can’t do this.” 
AF: I can’t do it. I’ll accept that I’m the devil – honestly, that’s what I came out to be. I was like, “Fine, I give up, I’ll get wings someday -sorry mom.” 
AJ: Right. Deuces and you bounced. So, through Host Home you were able to get somewhat stable housing. Ash Farah 
AF: Right. Because Host Home has case workers and a certain level of established prestige to help 
people like me. So, when the state gave me the option of living in a group home, go to a 
transitional living program for alcohol and drug addiction or sexual violence, which never fit me 
– and that was the judge’s problem, because they didn’t have the heart to just release me 
because that would mean releasing me back to my mother. But, also, to put me in all these 
cycles would ... the foster care system is like a system of instability. 
AJ: Yeah, and institutionalization. 
AF: It ruins people. Yeah. I’ve known kids that got into the foster care system and are now on 
Haldol and all these highly potent drugs just to go through the day because of the stuff they’ve 
been through. So, the judge was ultimately like this liberal white lady, tm, was like, “I want to 
let you go, but you are 1/2 , I can’t. Please just find ... I’ll give you three months to find an 
outlet for me to write you off to.” 
AJ: Oh, wow. 
AF: So, I began this search for, basically, roommates essentially – a shady search. This was the most 
shady search there ever was until one day I was just broken and I didn’t have the heart to go 
back to Café SouthSide after all the work they’d done. I tried ... it’s like a coping mechanism for 
me to be like, “Everything is fine, everything is OK,” when it’s not. I don’t know. I bought into a 
lot of binary ideas, I guess, until I was broken down in Central Mercado which is a Mexican 
restaurant near my school. I called up Blaine Kelley from OutFront and was like, “I don’t know 
what I’m going to do. I don’t know who I’m going to be with, this is scary, I have days until 
court and they’re going to place me in a group home with people who are coming in and out of 
juvey – I’m done, I’ve given up.” Honestly, at the brink of exhaustion. He was like, “Nope, 
we’re going to go to Rox.” All the way in the car, I was like, “I don’t want to, I don’t want to do 
it. Rox is going to be mad at me, I failed.” And all these things. 
AJ: Oh, my goodness. 
AF: When I got there, they were super loving and were like, “Here, have a mocca, it’s going to be 
OK, we’re going to find people.” And, of course, people came – people came in droves and they 
were like, “Hey, we went through the same thing.” That’s the thing that people don’t 
understand – like I can’t describe about the LGBT community. Either our elders, their stories 
may not be there, but you can feel them being there when you need people because they didn’t 
have anybody so they’re more likely to give back. 
AJ: Wow. That’s ... you’re breaking my heart, Ash. 
AF: It’s true though – they went to bat for trans kids. 
AJ: Right, for real. 
AF: I ain’t calling Blaine no elder though – sorry. 
AJ: So, let me ask you this, lets switch up a little bit. 
AF: Yay. Ash Farah 
AJ: What is the most positive aspect, or what are some of the most positive aspects of you now 
expressing your true gender identity? 
AF: Oh, my self-esteem has went up, my auditory skills have gotten better because I didn’t have the 
weight of, “Is this masculine? Is this too feminine?” I never have to do that because, honestly, 
fuck it. If people don’t respect my identity then they wouldn’t even if I had a voice that sounded 
like an 808 drum. 
AJ: Right, exactly – 808. 
AF: I have just felt like I can do the work that I want to do, I can be the doctor, I can be the things I 
want to do, I feel just ecstatic. It’s like I wasn’t living, I think, until around 9th grade and a half 
when I openly decided, “Hey, I’m trans, the world can go fuck itself, I am the devil, it’s fine, 
there’s nothing wrong me, there’s something wrong with it.” And, in that moment I felt my 
mental health get better, I found people that loved me for me. I don’t know, I just had this 
tremendous growth in the last three years because of such a simple thing – a simple statement 
like, “I am a man.” 
AJ: Yeah, wow. That’s powerful. What’s the current relationship like with your birth family – your 
siblings, your mom? 
AF: They’re getting there. The state ... the part that was really difficult was when the state 
ultimately got involved, my mom suffered some repercussions from it and being in poverty 
already, that limited her jobs to, like, zero, so she is always struggling and I have to deal with the 
backhand guilt of that. Ultimately, my siblings are the ones that suffer. 
AJ: Right. 
AF: I wish the system understood that. 
AJ: You were trying to be yourself and ... 
AF: Right, and birth mom, honestly, let me walk out the door, all I needed was a resource to go to. 
AJ: Right. 
AF: But, ultimately suffered ... the people who ultimately suffered were my siblings because birth 
mom is unemployed. 
AJ: So, they kind of blame you. 
AF: Yeah, of course they blame me. If they can’t get Eid presents, who are they going to blame? 
The black sheep of the family who ran off at 13, the one that they never get to see because ... 
you know. To walk up Cedar Avenue dressed like me would mean death to even go see them. 
So, I hate ... it’s all arbitrary because when I get birth mom now by herself she wants to accept, 
which is the hardest part for me – she wants to ... 
AJ: But it’s her cultural ... AF: 	Her culture, her community. She’s like, “How can I be proud of something that’s supposed to disgust me?” That’s literally what she just said to me like two weeks ago, when she ultimately agreed to go to my graduation. 
AJ: 	Yeah. She sounds like she’s going to come around. 
AF: 	I’m hoping. I’m missing my siblings again. 
AJ: 	Have you undergone any medical interventions at this point. 
AF: 	I got on T, which was a battle because I had no legal guardian and doctors were like, “I ain’t getting sued.” 
AJ: 	Right. 
AF: 	So, I got help and started T about two months ago and got off of it because – hey, insurance is a thing that you get off of when you’re off the state insurance, because once foster care left, I had no resources. I couldn’t access jack and I had no health care. So, either I continued to take these really high levels of testosterone with no control or labs, or I go off for a little bit and be sad. 
AJ: 	I think there’s some free clinics, though – or sliding scale clinics. 
AF: 	True. And, I’ve just found out about Family Tree, for example. 
AJ: 	Family Tree is the one I was going to say, yeah. 
AF: 	Right, it has a sliding scale fee I can go into so I’m going to start up again and with the newest refill – that’s exciting. 
AJ: 	Do you have any other plans for medical stuff? You can say no, I don’t want to talk about that, Andrea, because gender is not about what’s in-between your legs, it’s really about how we view ourselves and our internal realization of who we are. 
AF: 	If I really could just get my brain to agree with that statement, it would save me like $100,000 ... I don’t know how much. So, I got a PFund Scholarship, which is $10,000. 
AJ: 	Nice. 
AF: 	Yeah, originally for school but when I emailed them saying, “I magically paid off my school loans through a competition for leadership or something,” they were like, “Hey, do you want to use these funds for surgery?” So, I’m going to have my top surgery, which will remove these things off of my chest. 
AJ: 	What? 
AF: 	Right – in August. So, my graduation goals were simple – like, you’re going to get all your college paid for, you’re going to find a house, you’re going to leave this system, and you’re going to get top surgery before you go into college. You’re going to go in as Ash Farah, the fucking dude. 
AJ: 	What? You’ve been accepted into college? What college are you going to? 
Ash Farah 
AF: I’m going to go to Augsburg College. 
AJ: Wow. What do you plan to study? 
AF: Pre-med. 
AJ: Because you want to be ...? 
AF: I want to be one of the firsts, because I found out that there’s actually another trans surgeon 
out there who is bad-ass. 
AJ: Right. 
AF: I want to become one of the first Black trans men surgeons there is because ... hey, wouldn’t 
that be bad-ass to walk into a place, like a surgeon’s office, and go, “Hey, of course he’s going to 
respect me for being trans, he’s trans.” 
AJ: Yeah. I’m so looking forward to that day because I know it’s going to happen. 
AF: I’m very goal driven. 
AJ: Your spirit and your goals are incredible. So, you got a full ride to Augsburg. 
AF: Yes. 
AJ: And then PFund is like, “Well, why don’t you just take this $10,000 and use it for your own 
personal ...” 
AF: Needs. 
AJ: Needs – right. Your own self-care, really, is what it comes down to. 
AF: That’s the best gift I could have been given. 
AJ: That is incredible. Wow, I love this story. And, talk to me about relationships. Are you in a 
relationship? 
AF: Oh, Lord. 
AJ: What’s your sexual identity? 
AF: I’m a fuck boy. 
AJ: A fuck boy – what’s a fuck boy? 
AF: Ahhh ... 
AJ: Trap music. Define fuck boy, I don’t know what fuck boy is. 
AF: Somebody who doesn’t really have serious relationships and just goes around. Which is fine, 
because I never really ... it’s disrespectful to be like, “Hey, I’ve got the time for you,” when 
really I’ve got three hours and I’m spending it with Andrea this week. 
AJ: Exactly. So, “I’ll see you next week.” No, that’s what’s up. AF: Because nothing is a bigger turn off than being like, “Can I schedule this date three weeks in advance?” 
AJ: Yeah, that kind of sucks too. But, what’s your orientation? Who do you ... I mean, do you date guys, do you date women? Do you date trans people? 
AF: That would be awesome ... is there a word for that? 
AJ: Trans on trans dating – I don’t know. 
AF: That sounds like Black on Black crime. I don’t know about that. Oh, my God, a relationship would be a beautiful thing. So, I identify as bisexual so I like people who are femme and people who are masculine – their identity doesn’t matter to me. They could be trans, they could be androgynous. 
AJ: Cis. 
AF: Cis – yeah. It doesn’t matter. 
AJ: Which is nice. 
AF: But, also really no excuse for why I can’t find nobody. 
AJ: I know, you’ve got a pretty broad range. 
AF: Right, the whole ocean. 
AJ: Well, I think maybe the fuck boy status might have a little bit to do with that. 
AF: OK. 
AJ: But, at this point in your life, I think that’s fine. Actually, at any point in your life if that’s what you choose to do, that’s what’s up. What do you think the relationship is between the L, the G, the B, the bisexuals, and the T? Because you worked in ... when you were in high school, you worked in an LGBT organization and you’re getting ready to start working at another LGBT organization. In your opinion, how is that? 
AF: Drop the T is real. 
AJ: Drop the T is real? 
AF: Yes. 
AJ: What is Drop the T? Say more about that. I mean, I know what it’s about, but maybe our friends who might tune into this at some point may not be aware. 
AF: Drop the T is when, in the acronym LGBT, people don’t focus on ... they focus specifically on LGB and nothing on T, to the point where LGB issues are the only ones present and they use the full acronym to describe that as the whole community. For example, LGBT issues on this list of issues that we could talk about as a GSA, immediately the ones that were like given to us, or whatever, was gay marriage and issues like gay marriage, adoption, and things like ... I was like, “What about trans day of remembrance? Why is that not on there? They’re killing us.” Ash Farah 
AJ: Yeah. 
AF: Literally, across our school, the little Wendy’s we go to eat – across from it there’s a Schooner’s 
Bar where CeCe got attacked and jailed in a male prison as a trans woman and nobody knows 
about that. 
AJ: Yeah, less than two blocks from your school. 
AF: Less than two blocks from South, and all these issues – and none of it gets brought up because 
trans people are just left under the rug and they have the audacity to let some white boy from 
Kansas play the first rioter in some movie called Stonewall. There’s interracial history and this 
push for being normal, like heteronormative, to the point where we can sell LGB but we can’t 
sell the T so we’re going to drop it. 
AJ: Wow. 
AF: And that’s what ultimately started happening in organizations like the Human Rights Campaign 
and all these other places – even here in Minneapolis. 
AJ: Actually, to be fair, the Human Rights Campaign actually ... 
AF: True, fixed it. 
AJ: ... said no, “No, we’re not.” But some of the other major organizations were really having 
these discussions. 
AF: Right. 
AJ: And, I’m not a fan of HRC, I just want to be ... we’ve got to give them credit, right? 
AF: Right, they’ve been doing shit. 
AJ: They did their thing on that particular issue – they did, in the past, throw the trans community 
under the bus, which they have never really been forgiven for, but rightfully so. 
AF: But, they’re certainly not the only organization who’s done that. 
AJ: No, not at all. What do you think the agenda for the trans community should be going forward, 
Ash? 
AF: Ahh, agenda. We have no agendas. If Bill O’Reilly, or whoever the fuck is watching this, we 
have no agendas, no little lists. But, honestly, some agendas, I think, should be ... the focus 
point is where we’re hurting the most, to me: homelessness, joblessness, and, honestly, 
violence – to the point that we need resources going to this. And, of course, the bathroom bill 
laws are real but they’re basically chosen horses to dissimilate and destroy all other forms of 
life. 
AJ: Right – speak young man. I’m loving this. 
AF: But, it’s true. Those bathroom bills have a lot of words and once you start reading them you 
find out, “Oh, this is deliberate, there’s other things involved.” AJ: Right. 
AF: It’s not just about where you get to pee because there’s no officer that’s going to stop anybody from walking into any bathroom. 
AJ: Exactly. And people have been peeing for the last thousands and thousands and thousands of years in bathrooms, trans people, so give me a break. 
AF: God. And, health care – being trans will be considered a pre-existing condition. You can’t get a job and once you can’t get a job you are forced to what I had to deal with – hustle, basically. Once you get into that there’s this whole prison ... 
AJ: Criminal, prison industrial complex stuff kicks into place. 
AF: Yeah, bullshit where trans people get stuck and LGBT people get stuck and aren’t going to ... and there are all these things that are interlocked but once you start to focus on where you’re hurting the most, you can heal the whole wound. That’s the way I see it. 
AJ: So, homelessness and employment are really, and access to medical ... yeah, the violence goes down. If you’ve got a home and a job ... 
AF: Stable and ... once you get money in America, that’s what leads you to vote. 
AJ: Yeah, the likelihood of being murdered decreases. I mean, it’s not ... transphobia is real. 
AF: It’s significant. If you had a home and agency then it’s ... 
AJ: Yeah, then you can navigate through some of that stuff. 
AF: Right. You’re going to have a lot better interaction with police if you have a lawyer, that kind of thing – all these things. We really should focus on that, and by we, I mean the LGB as well. 
AJ: Yeah, I hear you. Where do you think the trans community is going to be in the next years, Ash? 
AF: Oh, gosh. This is the part where I’m not malistic. 
AJ: You’ll still be here, I might not be here. 
AF: Oh, come on – you might pull a Miss Major, it will be fun. 
AJ: That’s my girl, Miss Major. I love that you’re dropping all this history and knowledge today. CeCe McDonald ... 
AF: Because we need to remember our history. 
AJ: Yes. 
AF: I felt disrespected when I found out about Sylvia Rivera and Marsha P. Johnson and Miss Major because I was downright – like, nobody ever told me about this. I knew about Oscar Wilde and that was the only gay man I’ve ever read about. 
AJ: OK. Ash Farah 
AF: That and Alexander the Great, but that was a whole thing. 
AJ: Keep it 100, wow. 
AF: That will do it, you’ve got to learn about it. 
AJ: But, what do you think about the future? 
AF: Oh, that. I’m really hopeful – to a point where it’s almost childish. I think that’s the only 
immature part of me is the blind hope, because I can see it. I can see the change. 
AJ: That’s not immature, that’s real. Your last president wrote a whole book called The Audacity of 
Hope. 
AF: To be able to say it’s going to get better when it’s absolute shit. 
AJ: And I don’t think he’s immature. 
AF: Yeah, he’s definitely not. I definitely think it’s going to get better because I got to see it in the 
eyes of all the youth that I work with and the changes we could make. And, if a couple little 
punks can make all these changes, imagine if all these little punks grew up and had money and 
had jobs and voted and did all these things. 
AJ: Right, and became surgeons. 
AF: Right. Then, of course it’s going to get better. 
AJ: Wow. So, this is Ash leaving you guys with some hope because as President Obama has said, it’s 
easy to be cynical but hope is better. So, stay hopefully. Ash, I’ve just got to say I’m so honored 
that you are willing to share your story today. I guess the last thing I would ask you about 
because you, I believe, identify as an ex-Muslim. 
AF: Which is hard. 
AJ: What does that mean to you? 
AF: It means that you disagree with the fundamental tenets of Islam, that you do not agree with the 
social ... the public, the mainstream, social tenets of Islam, the social issues. Islam and the 
Quran is not like the Bible. People often equate the two because, of course, they’re Abrahamic 
religions and they’re similar. But, the Bible has stories and histories and all these things 
intertwined. It’s not a singular book, it’s a library, basically. 
AJ: Right, yeah. It’s a collection of books. 
AF: Right. But, the Quran is one book. It is a manuscript for how you’re supposed to live your life – 
down to the dime. I was told whenever ... the moment you’re born, you have a good angel and 
a bad angel and they record every little thing you’ve ever done and they point it out on the day 
of judgment and you’re going to have it scaled. Islam is very mathematical, it’s very concrete – 
because it wanted to be accessible throughout all the cultures. 
AJ: Sure. Ash Farah 
AF: Which is the one good thing about Islamic, it could spread like crazy because it had no race tied 
to it or all these things. 
AJ: Interesting. 
AF: But, it’s a lot of bullshit because what also it was tied to – the homophobia, the transphobia, and 
other bigotry at the time. The misogyny because it was a male-dominated society, classism – to 
the point where nowhere in the Quran, here’s the part where people are going to disagree with 
me, does it outright ban slavery. It doesn’t condone it, it doesn’t want you to, it has protocols 
for how you free your slaves and how that can get you to heaven and stuff, but it does not 
outright condone it. 
AJ: Wow. 
AF: So, from the beginning, I was being taught that my existence was from the generosity of 
someone else. Women, in general, aren’t respected and people will argue that it’s no fault of 
the Quran but the way it’s applied – but, application is all that matters. 
AJ: Right, exactly. 
AF: I don’t get to see the ideal Islam, you get to see the ones people produce and the ones people 
produce is filled with hatred, it’s ... the thing that’s difficult talking about being ex-Muslim is 
that you’re expected to ride this line of simultaneously defending Muslim people as human 
beings because your criticism will be weaponized against you. 
AJ: Yeah, that’s a man. 
AF: But, at the same time defending your right to live and your apostasy, because in Islam apostasy 
is ... you have to die, there’s no other rule, it’s just met with death. Once you accept Islam and 
you de-accept or you’re ex-Muslim, you just die, that’s the way you should go. It’s honorable to 
do that. 
AJ: Wow. 
AF: To the point where we have people being beheaded because they listen to some rap lyric in 
Saudi Arabia. 
AJ: Oh, my goodness. 
AF: Right, this is the truth, when you take the most extreme form of it you get to see the way it is. 
When you water it down, you put your own cultural values and stuff like this ... it becomes a 
more beautiful thing and it becomes more stories and morals you live by. But, the vast majority 
of the world aren’t living by that. In Indonesia, a recently – recently homogenized Muslim 
population is now caning gay people. It is a direct correlation, and in my culture, the word libab, 
which meant trans, is erased from their vocabulary around the same time Islam because fully 
prominent, where Jews were exiled and left out to Ethiopia and it became fully homogenized, 
these words disappeared and words have history too. 
AJ: So, you’re saying trans identity has always existed in “East African culture” or Somali culture. Ash Farah 
AF: Right, because you can see it ... in older people, when I say the word libab, they recognize it. 
They’re like, “Oh, those people.” They lived in blah, blah, blah woods, they’re traditionally 
pagan, they have memories. But, once you go down two or three, no recollection. “What do 
you mean?” Because there was outright ... 
AJ: How do you spell libab? 
AF: L-i-b-a-b. Libab. 
AJ: Oh, wow – libab. 
AF: Yeah, and it just means gender non-conforming, but people use it for trans. So, yeah. It’s just . . 
. it’s so hard to talk about Islam because simultaneously I want to defend the poor woman who 
is being harassed on the street because of her hijab. She has no business ... nobody has 
business being harassed. 
AJ: Right. 
AF: But, at the same time, this whole ... it’s an unholy book to me, just filled with ... I can’t even 
recite to you the verses most of the time. People don’t take the time to actually read it. And, of 
course, there’s beautiful things like the one chapter saying, “You have your religion and I’ll have 
mine,” but the ones following after that is the slaughtering of that very person who said that. 
AJ: Wow. 
AF: On the doorsteps of the hedge, which is the ultimate ... you know, temple. 
AJ: Well, all of those religions, their mission was to try to ... 
AF: Convert. 
AJ: Convert other people to their religions. 
AF: To the point where they freed a slave, called Bilal, which is ... the funny part is originally his 
name, Bali, or whatever, was a demon at the time and all that. But, Bilal, because they 
humanized the name, he became Muslim, one of the first “slaves”, one of the first Black people 
– they don’t teach ... they teach Americans the first slave to become Muslim, they teach others 
the first Black person to become Muslim, because he basically took a beating to the point where 
he kept saying, “There’s only one God,” all these things, and he converted. And, because of his 
conversation, he was let to be free and was given money and status. That was applied 
throughout East Africa with traitors promising wealth and money and all these things. 
AJ: If you convert to Islam. 
AF: If you convert. So, to convert is to lose your social standing, to lose your support system, and to 
become an ex-Muslim is to become an outcast. 
AJ: Well, I appreciate you being willing to talk about this. This is in no way ... I think what ... I just 
read a Facebook post today from a Black trans person saying how difficult it is to talk about 
transphobia and homophobia in the Black community without giving fodder or language for Ash Farah 
critics and opponents to weaponize that language. And so, it’s a very tight line that you have to 
walk. 
AF: Right. Do I translate this verse for him so he can walk out and harass the nearest Muslim he 
meets? Or, do I keep it to myself and take the hatred I get from my own community and just let 
it die with me? 
AJ: Yeah, that’s a tough place to be. It’s, unfortunately ... you know, a dichotomy, I think, that a lot 
of trans people face with their identity versus whatever religious position that they sort of were 
indoctrinated into as a child. So, I honor that struggle and deeply respect your courage to be 
who you are. It’s so important, Ash. Thank you so much for sharing your time and your story. 
Until we meet again. 
AF: Right. It’s OK, gaybies – it’s fine. 
AJ: It gets better. 
AF: It is going to get better. 
AJ: All right. Peace. 