Sayuri Hernandez Narrator Andrea Jenkins Interviewer
Andrea Jenkins -AJ 
Sayuri Hernandez -SH 
AJ: So, hello. My name is Andrea Jenkins and I am the oral historian for the Transgender Oral History Project at the Tretter Collection at the University of Minnesota. Today is September 12, 2016. Iím on campus here at the University of Minnesota in the Anderson Library and today I have the pleasure of interviewing Sayuri Hernandez. Did I say that right? 
SH: You did, hi. 
AJ: How are you? 
SH: Iím well, Iím good. Iím excited. 
AJ: Wonderful. Sayuri, why donít you just state your name and how you spell it, and then state your gender identity today, your gender assigned at birth, and your pronouns. 
SH: OK. Should I ... hi, people. Should I be looking at you or looking that way? 
AJ: Just look right at me. 
SH: OK, looking at you. My name is Sayuri River Hernandez. The first spelling is S-a-y-u-r-I, the origin is actually Japanese. I discovered it through the story of Memoirs of a Geisha. The name actually means small lily and I have a lotus lily on my chest and Iím small, my parents are petite. I picked it because the story of Sayuri in Memoirs of a Geisha, she rises like a phoenix from the ashes. She was malnurtured by her family and cast away into a position of being a maid for a geisha house and then she rises into her own as one of the most legendary geishas and when she made her debut in the movie, everything stood still and all you could do is look. ìHere I am, Sayuri, Iím here.ÅE 
AJ: How do you spell it? 
SH: S-a-y-u-r-i. 
AJ: OK. 
SH: Yup. And then I picked ... actually I was in a group for chemical dependency with this kind of folky-lesbian girl. She helped me pick River. I identify as a child of the river because of my religious faith and river, ever change/ever flowing. It was a little hippie. So, yeah. 
AJ: Wow, the Mississippi River is right outside of the window here. 
SH: Yeah, I actually really think that that is part of the reason why Iíve lived here for so long. Iíve done a lot of moving around and Iíve been here years. 
AJ: Is that right? 
SH: Yeah. 
AJ: So your last name is Hernandez? 
SH: Yeah, Hernandez. 
AJ: How do you spell that? 
SH: Itís H-e-r-n-a-n-d-e-z. 
AJ: OK. 
SH: Iím Puerto Rican, German, and Irish. 
AJ: Puerto Rican, German, and Irish. Whatís your gender identity? 
SH: My gender identity is heterosexual female. 
AJ: OK. What was your identity assigned at birth? 
SH: I was assigned at birth a genetic man - male. And I prefer she ... I donít even really like girl, especially if itís ... I know they mean the best, but gay boys go, ìHey girl.ÅE Iím not into that, thatís not my thing. Lady, I like Doll, I like Babe. I donít mind Bitch ... you know, if somebody is just ... 
AJ: If you know the context of how people are using it. 
SH: Yeah, yeah, yeah ÅEtotally. And not in a way where itís being ... Iím a feminist but not when itís being derogatory towards the female gender. If a man were to say that to me in a way where it was just more of ... with an intimacy, Iíd be OK with that. But I mean itís just because ... like Latrice Royale from RuPaulís Drag Race says, ìYou know what bitch means? Itís being in total control of herself.ÅE Strong personalities do get mistaken for bitches sometimes. 
AJ: This is very true. 
SH: Yeah. 
AJ: Yeah. A man, itís called being a leader and in a woman itís called being a bitch. 
SH: Yeah, one of the things ... Iíve only been transitioning for a year. I did live as a girl when I was for a summer, but I got scared. The examples I had of trans life and more so like maybe fluid drag queen and such was a lot of chemical dependency and prostitution and such. Something within me as a 15- or 16-year-old told me that I didnít want to live that kind of life so I went back home to my family and continued on in high school. But the whole idea that a woman is not supposed to be outspoken, thatís where my feminism comes in, Iím sorry. If thereís a situation where I need to say something, I will. 
AJ: Youíre going to speak up. 
SH: I will, yeah. I really truly ... I remember seeing a documentary of James Baldwin ... or no, Bayard Rustin. 
AJ: Bayard Rustin, yeah. 
SH: Heís one of my favorite, favorite ... heís one of my idols, one of the influential people in my story. I saw him saying, ìWhat we need is a group of angelic troublemakers.ÅE I identify also as an angelic troublemaker. 
AJ: I love that phrase ÅEangelic troublemaker. So where were you born? 
SH: I was born in Houston in a hospital that was for people who, low income. Itís a famous hospital, Jefferson Davis Hospital. Ironically, Iíve never been back there to see it, but I was living in Michigan and one day, out of the blue, ironically on this Sunday morning news in Flint, Michigan, it said, ìToday in Houston, Jefferson Davis Hospital was imploded to the ground.ÅE So I knew and God knew that I always wanted to, or my creator ÅEwhatever you want to call yours, I wanted to go see that someday and I watched it go to the ground. Iím like, ìThank you, God.ÅE So at least I saw it before it was completely gone. 
AJ: All right. Whatís your earliest memory in life, Sayuri? The first thing you remember. 
SH: The first thing I remember is either dancing in front of the TV to the Solid Gold Dancers in a big T-shirt, as a 3-year-old or when my dad was willing to buy me platform kidís toy heels ÅEthe ones in the 1970s with a rainbow strap. My mom wasnít very happy but my dad was willing to accommodate what I was drawn to, within my instincts. 
AJ: So as a little boy, your dad was going to buy you platform ... 
SH: He did. 
AJ: He did buy you platform heels. 
SH: Also too, I was a bit of a wanderer as a toddler, to the point where my mom had CPS, Child Protective Services, called on her. I would just leave playgrounds and stuff, I was just kind of ... already, I just wanted to travel. Ironically, I traveled as an adult through the world. 
AJ: So youíd just bounce, youíd just take off? 
SH: Yeah, Iíd just run off. And so I walked across a busy street, synonymous with four or six lanes, intersection traffic, as a 3- or 4-year-old to get Josie and the Pussycat Underroos from Target. 
AJ: What? 
SH: Yes, yes. I loved the Josie and the Pussycat characters, the girls and the cat, they were my favorite. I wanted to be them. I loved Hanna Barbera, the cartoon company. And so I went up to the counter, to the lady, and I said, ìYou know ...ÅE And she said, ìDo you have any money?ÅE I said, ìNo.ÅE And sheís like, ìWell, you canít have these.ÅE And so I took a pack of gum on the way out the door. So at even a very young age was rebellious. 
AJ: Did you get in trouble? 
SH: No, no. 
AJ: And this was in Houston? 
SH: Yeah. 
AJ: What was family life like? 
SH: Oh boy. Well, my parents were addicts. My dad was a Vietnam Veteran and he had met my mother at ... she was 16, and my grandmother was very small town, small minded white woman-ish. She had a mammy when my mom was growing up and such, I heard stories about this insanity. When she found out that my mother was dating a Puerto Rican, my aunt Vicky had told on my mother, and I think she initially said, ìIf you marry that spic youíre out of my house.ÅE And so, my aunt had actually told my grandmother that she was having relations with my dad and thereís a picture of my grandfather and my grandmother, and this is on my motherís side, with my mom and my dad ÅEshe forced her to get married to 16, to this man. 
AJ: Your father? 
SH: Yes, my grandmother. I guess her and my mother didnít really have ... my grandmother and my mother on my momís side didnít really have that good of a relationship, I think it was a convenient way for my grandmother to move my mother along. She was also very defiant, usually addicts are. So, I was born when she was and then my brother came three years later. My mom started to have an affair with a man that would be my stepfather and I just ... I went through a lot of hardship and disappointing experiences because of that. He was not a nice person, he wasnít interested in being a father to my motherís kids from her initial marriage with my father. But, for better or worse, heís the only father Iíve really known. My real father was into the heroin culture in Houston and chose addiction and prostitutes and working ... he just couldnít be a father, he wasnít able to. 
AJ: Wow, thatís kind of tough. 
SH: It was. As a woman I have daddy issues ÅElike Rihanna or Lana Del Ray, Iím very that. 
AJ: Who Del Ray? 
SH: Lana Del Ray. They say Lana Del Ray and Rihanna, they exhibit daddy issues ÅEthey want somebody to save them or take care of them and kind of like danger and seduction. 
AJ: I donít know who Lana Del Ray is. 
SH: You donít. Iím going to send you some good songs of hers. 
AJ: OK, sheís a singer. 
SH: Yeah, sheís kind of white hot, but death wishy and beautiful and sings almost like Nancy Sinatra back in the day. Sheís really cool. 
AJ: Oh wow. OK. So you have one sibling? 
SH: Actually, I am the oldest of five. With my stepfather, my mother had three daughters, so I have three beautiful sisters. I have three stepbrothers and sisters from my dadís marriage, so there is a birth order characteristic concept where people take ... they tend to have traits according to their birth order and I have character traits, birth order characteristic traits of first born and fourth born. They would weave in and out of our household according to what was going on with their mother, so they would be there/they wouldnít be there. They would be there/ they wouldnít be ÅEsporadically. 
AJ: Wow. Do you get along with your siblings? 
SH: Hmmm, well. I come from a family that is not very big on communication, shoving things under the rug, and family not being a real priority. I just kind of, ìOh, weíre going to all act like we know each other really well when we have family vacation but nothing really past that.ÅE I know that my mother was really close to her sisters in her family, my stepdad was very estranged from his family and also my real father was very estranged with his siblings. Resentments and rivalries and, ìIím never talking to you againÅEÅEthat kind of thing. So my siblings and myself, we all live in different states. Weíre a very colorful family. I have a gay brother, he was military, his husband is a lifer in the military, they just had a baby. 
AJ: Oh wow. 
SH: Yeah, one of my sisters was also military and sheís so humble and selfless, sheís that energy in my immediate family. She surrogately carried my brotherís husbandís seed and had a baby for them. 
AJ: Wow, thatís pretty fascinating. 
SH: Yeah, it made me feel conservative. Iím like, ìYouíre doing what for who?ÅE But yeah. 
AJ: Wow. When is the first time you realized that you were not the gender you were assigned at birth, Sayuri? 
SH: I think when I wanted to take the girlís dolls clothing and put it on my Mickey Mouse. I stole it, I took it. Wanting to have the Underoos, wanting to have the heels, I always played in my Aunt Debbieís shoes in Conroe, Texas. I always loved to be able to do that. I didnít identify with male things, I never have. 
AJ: Really? 
SH: No. And then in elementary school I remember just being in-between because the boys didnít want to play with me because I said I was a girl, and the girls wouldnít play with me because it goes against the grain of the social norm of gender binary pressure and norms. 
AJ: Wow. So you didnít have very many friends in school? 
SH: No. I remember playing on the playground a lot in solitude, to where even, later on, in 4th grade, since home life wasnít very therapeutic, I was on the playground and patiently waiting for school to start again. I was one of those kids that really spoke to the teachers more than I talked to the other students. 
AJ: So you had some pretty close relationships with teachers? 
SH: I did, invaluable ÅEreally, that got me through really school, attending school. I loved school, I love to learn. I loved all that. So, yeah. 
AJ: So you realized when you were wanting the Underoos and the heels and all of that stuff ... 
SH: Yeah, and plastic heels and jelly bracelets back in the Madonna days. 
AJ: I remember those. 
SH: As soon as I saw George Michael with the earring, I really wanted to get one but I was too scared to ask. 
AJ: Wow. So, when did you begin to express yourself? Were you bullied in school at all? 
SH: Yeah, I was called a girl and a fag ÅEyeah. I never knew it ... my stepfather was raised very strictly Jehovah Witness, so then therefore that left us with a household of no religion and no talk of it. Iím very spiritual and was always searching for my faith. 
AJ: So he was ... I hate to cut you off, but I just want to be clear. He was raised Jehovah Witness but then once he became an adult, he shooed all religion. 
SH: Yeah, he wasnít feeling the ... 
AJ: Religion. 
SH: No. 
AJ: And your mom wasnít very religious? 
SH: No. She comes from a predominantly apocalyptic type, you know, intense southern bible belt Christian family. 
AJ: Sanctified. 
SH: These are end times, what youíre doing if youíre any kind of alternative sexuality or lifestyle, itís an abomination. My aunt told me that my mother should have drown me when I was born. 
AJ: Oh. 
SH: Actually when I was 15, I had the freedom and the safety of doing my make-up and dressing as a girl with my cousins Lissy and ... 
AJ: Leslie and who? 
SH: Lissy and ... I think just Lissy, Lizzy, in Oklahoma. But one night my mother and my aunt were having some beer or whatever, but I ended up getting into a fist fight with my Aunt Vicky because she insisted that I take my make-up off and I refused to. 
AJ: Really? 
SH: Yeah. 
AJ: And you were like 15, you said? 
SH: Yeah, or 15. I never ... this is a grown woman, very much older than me. I was going to run away that night and I actually ... yeah. 
AJ: Were you dating at the time? 
SH: So when I was 15, I began to ... I ran away and then I ended up living with somebody. I asked my mom to emancipate me and to give power of attorney to a drag queen/trans person. 
AJ: Really? 
SH: Yeah. She still resents me for that to this day. 
AJ: Your mother? 
SH: Yes. She still has resentments about that. But, the other side of the coin is your husband is abusing me, Iím living in fear, youíre not strong enough to leave it even though you know you should, why do you want me to stick around? Thatís your mess, Iíve had enough of it. Yeah, so I lived as a girl at 15. I dated Marines ÅEtheyíre feeling me, Iím 15-years-old. I was pretty naÅEe though. I went down to Toledo, Ohio, for a drag contest and I got quite drunk at 15. I was in a beautiful dress and stuff like that, I almost got raped in the alley by someone. I was so drunk though, I should not have been that drunk, and the security guard, by the grace of God, came and saved me. But I got blamed for that by the people I was with, for being too intoxicated. 
AJ: Wow. Itís so funny that people victim blame women for menís actions. 
SH: Yeah, it is crazy. Just to give my mom some ... so this lesbian had said, ìYouíre gay,ÅEand it didnít sit with me right. It was this one, she was kind of like my protector when we moved to Michigan, and I had wrote this boy a letter. But I had had relations with him, it was like my first authentic homosexual experience. I felt very dirty and it didnít feel right at all. I called my mom and said, ìDonít read that note.ÅE Well, when I got home she was passed out from drinking and my stepdad had me by the neck up against the wall. And so, I really ... I really, I think if society looked at the attributes of oneís coming out process, I think thereís probably definitely a much higher rate of substance abuse and mental health challenges and stuff within the GLBT community. But my mother, when I was living as a girl, she actually accepted that better. When Tula was on Sally Jessy Raphael, she taped that for me. Itís funny, I think a mother internally and naturally, when something is truth, I think that a mother has no choice but to unconditionally support that because they know itís true. But I think my mom was right, that something just wasnít right and she couldnít come to terms with it. I never identified as gay, that never made any sense to me. I would look at gay culture, like men on men, it really just didnít ... something wasnít clicking. I couldnít resonate. Not to get into stereotypes, thereís reasons that are true ÅEIím not into musicals, Iím not into furniture. I just want skin care. 
AJ: Glitter? No glitter, you donít like glitter? 
SH: I love glitter. 
AJ: OK. Oh, wow. You had kind of a tough childhood growing up? 
SH: I have. 
AJ: And you said you guys moved to Michigan at some point? 
SH: Oh gosh. So we did Houston, Texas; Glen Arden, North Carolina ... 
AJ: Which? 
SH: Glen Arden, North Carolina. 
AJ: Glen Arden. 
SH: Yeah, itís hear Asheville. 
AJ: How do you spell that? 
SH: G-l-e-n A-r-d-e-n. 
AJ: OK, just like it sounds. Glen Arden. 
SH: And then we moved to Big Spring, Texas, and then back to Houston, and then up to Indiana, and then Michigan finally. My stepfather was an engineer and so he would just pull up the roots from where we were trying to get used to, said place, and every time he was offered another $10,000 or $20,000. So he was a provider, I canít say ... he was a provider, but he wasnít nurturing nor did he have any compassion or interest in supporting hobbies and such. My real dad would pay for my gymnastics and as soon as he was unable to they wouldnít help me with it. So thatís actually ... I went back in the closet as a woman at and what had happened was I was in gymnastics when I was about or 12, I was always too afraid to do back handsprings, back flips on my own, I always had to have a spotter ÅEI had too much fear, which would make sense growing up around abuse and seeing my mom abused. But, last year in treatment ... for me, with my spirituality, the convergence of people, just like I saw you out in the hallway. 
AJ: Right. 
SH: Those moments when people collide, to me that space, that time is God. I walked in the gym at the Pride Institute and saw this beautiful young Native American girl do a back flip, and sheís a woman that just so happens to be trans and thatís actually the wording that I use to identify, and she did a back flip and I looked over and I said, ìHuh, I was always too afraid to do that.ÅE And through the process of recovery and going through self-discovery, I really believe that the brain can hide things and store them like a file underneath a vault. And for some reason, seeing her do that activated that in my brain and the next day in small group it just came out like a ton of bricks. I was staring right at her and the look in her eyes, I understood that look and I connected with her. You could see in her eyes she was like, ìOh my God,ÅEshe just couldnít believe what she was hearing and neither could anybody else. But the first time I was at Pride in 2010, I looked at my counselor, we were sitting on a little couch, and I said, ìI think I might be trans,ÅEand I leaned into her in tears. The next day she asked me about it and I shut it down, I pushed it away ÅEI wouldnít discuss it, I wasnít ready. I wasnít able to cope with it. But I think through not being able to stay abstinent from drugs and alcohol, with being back in treatment, certain variables just happened to where, ìWait a minute, why am I always so ... why do I gravitate towards trans women? Why do I care? Why do I cry when I watch RuPaulís Drag Race?ÅE 
AJ: You cry at RuPaulís Drag Race? 
SH: Yeah. 
AJ: Those queens are always cutting each other up. 
SH: The victoriousness. 
AJ: I know, I know ÅEI understand. 
SH: OK. 
AJ: But itís a very mean show though, itís snarky. 
SH: Yeah, it is. Also too ... 
AJ: But itís our community, itís a part of our community. 
SH: Yeah, totally. I think also too ... I even cry when I see The Biggest Loser or the Olympics. I love to see people succeeding no matter what. 
AJ: OK. 
SH: You know? Coming from nothing and ending up something. Itís beautiful. Like you. 
AJ: Well, this is ... I came from a very humble beginning in Chicago. And I donít know if Iím something but ... Iím something, I donít know. 
SH: You are. 
AJ: But weíre here to talk about you, donít try to put this out on me, honey. Whatís it like with your mom today? Do you talk to her, do you communicate? 
SH: (pause) I ... so part of recovery in a 12-step model, one goes to deal with their resentments and make amends. I went down to my mom and I discussed with her, and it took a couple of rounds because all we would do is argue, and she finally disclosed to me that my real father was the first person to ever give her heroin. It helped me realize, you know what ÅEI canít blame them, they were just kids. They had no chance. But, Iím a feminist, Iím all about social injustice, I was ... for me, I think it was the will of the universe for me to walk through the hardships I did to make me the strong person that I am. Iím hyper vigilant, I am very perceptive, I know whatís going on, my eyes are open to the injustices of the world because of what I went through. However, I have to deal with ... as a result of that, I have the diagnosis of borderline personality disorder because of an invalidating environment and my social environment. For me, thatís her fault because she sacrificed the well-being of her childrenís mental health and also exposed them to trauma and left them with traumatic events to have within their development so that she didnít have to fend for her children on her own or make the effort to find a new husband. There was a lot of dysfunction. I find her to be very unaccountable about it. But my mom, Iíve become the opposite of her. She doesnít like to talk about feelings, I actually tested it. I tried to put my arm around her ÅEshe would only tuck me into bed, there was no affection like, ìOh, I love you, muh, muh, muh.ÅE 
AJ: Right. 
SH: I tried to put my arm around her and she started to get squirrely and not feeling it within a matter of like seconds. I try to talk to my mother about something and if itís something she doesnít want to talk about she will jump in her car and leave. She can be very cold and very selfish in that regard. But, I just ... I donít really have anything to say to her. I donít know her, I feel bad for her. Iíve always just wanted her to take her ... empower herself. Iíve taken womenís studies classes, Iím all about the empowerment of women, I am not about the suppression of women. Iím a feminist that likes to wear heels, I will wear skin tight clothes ... a cami with some Daisy Duke shorts because I work on my body ÅEyou know what? Donít get it twisted, I ainít no ho and youíre not going to treat me like that either, the slut walk that people do nationwide. I like to push the envelope on misconceptions and challenge peopleís views and filters of what women are. 
AJ: Wow. So today, you got your workout outfit on. Do you work out a lot? 
SH: I actually ... so, I had a lot of anxiety and fear in school in regards to participating in physical education and I did not want to go into the locker rooms. Oh, I didnít even realize that ÅEthat was probably part of being trans. 
AJ: Yeah. 
SH: But I got kicked off teams and discriminated against even though I was really into physical fitness. So as an adult itís been a very healing point for me. 
AJ: Oh good. 
SH: I started yoga about eight years ago and actually became an instructor and a spin cycle instructor, like indoor cycling. I havenít worked out for about three months. I was working for a yoga organization doing yoga ÅEworking and then getting it for free, but due to my transition, my workout goals have changed. I care about my thighs, my hips, and my abs. I donít want to work on my arms no more, Iím working on trying to get a booty. 
AJ: Get the thickness, huh? 
SH: Yes, so Iím just working on making sure I look good in the heels, honey, and keeping my ... because the hormones be affecting the stomach a little bit. 
AJ: Thatís true. 
SH: Yeah, so Iím back doing it. I have a sponsee, because as I mentioned Iím in recovery. I have over a year clean. 
AJ: Congratulations, thatís awesome. 
SH: Thank you, thank you. This period of recovery is the longest Iíve ever been clean. So ... yeah. Itís exciting. So I started working back out at the gym with my sponsee. So weíre hitting it and I was there this morning ÅEyeah. I am not used to ... I prefer to be dolled up and be painted. 
AJ: Where do you go to work out? 
SH: I go to LA Fitness. 
AJ: Fun. Uptown? 
SH: Uptown, St. Paul ÅEyeah. 
AJ: Thatís cool. Youíve got to take care of yourself. Tell me what kinds of challenges youíve faced since you have begun to express your true gender identity. 
SH: Yeah, sure. Oh my gosh, thereís so many. I mean, you know, having ... Iím sorry, I donít mean to be saying ìyou knowÅE Tucking, a good ... 
AJ: What is tucking? 
SH: Tucking is ... 
AJ: I know what tucking is but people listening to us may not know. 
SH: OK, so tucking is when a transgender female is placing her toolbox down there in a position to where she can wear ... where her genitalia is not showing. You know, Iíve heard some trans people ÅElike theyíre OK if theyíre wearing a dress and they donít tuck, I tuck. I actually prefer to be tucked now at all times, except for when Iím at home and going to bed and stuff. But I mean if it ... but anyways, itís a matter of within the groin inguinal area, the pubic area, the testes go up into the caves of a genetic maleís space and then the scrotum wraps around the penis and then it goes back ... I use like a triangular shaped piece of denim, like from the cuff of a jean, and then the elastic of underwear, like boyís underwear, and so the ring of the elastic goes through the double-sided still together triangle and it fastens the junk down there in position and then a pair of underwear to wear ... it gives the appearance and feel of having a vagina. 
AJ: It doesnít hurt? 
SH: Sometimes it does. You can have a bad tuck. Sometimes the scrotum side is coming out. Having really tight shorts on, which sometimes I like to wear ÅEIíve got everything really tucked and I can feel, like Iím really feeling my tuck ÅEitís starting to pinch because the penis is going back and the skin is being impacted and such, but as a girl told me before, you get used to it. 
AJ: Oh wow. 
SH: Itís better to use really, really soft denim, because Iíve used a little bit courser and less worn down, if you will ÅEless soft. I was actually contemplating coming up with a silk fabric, like oh my God this is so comfortable, tuck company ÅElike custom tucks, but it probably would take a while to make those as opposed to how much ... I donít think the revenue would be there, but I thought it was a good idea. 
AJ: Yeah ... 
SH: That was a challenge, trying to find the correct size. Sometimes itís a little too thick or not long enough, so itís a trial and error of cutting the triangle, which has a ... itís still attached there and at the top, obviously, from a cuff, and finding out what your size is. When you find one thatís pretty much on the money then you take that and use that as a pattern for your other tucks. 
AJ: So you sew the elastic on to the denim? 
SH: No, so then if you imagine a jean cuff, then a triangle is cut out and that goes in the pubic region, and so the underwear elastic is cut-off on the top and that runs through the jean cuff and so the legs go in on each side. 
AJ: Oh, OK. 
SH: So if you have the underwear elasticity, that would be together, you would run that through the clamp of the tuck, the fabric ÅEwhich is a triangle shape, and then keep it in place and you hold everything back as you pull it up. All this stuff can be found on YouTube. 
AJ: OK. Wow, thatís fascinating. Thatís a challenge. 
SH: It is. 
AJ: Have you had any challenges with employment or housing or other systems? 
SH: Yeah. Formerly in my professional life, I was an executive assistant. Iíve worked for some pretty big deal companies and pretty big deal people. When I say that, I mean people who manage a lot of people and make a substantial amount of money. I supported the chief officer of the American Hospital Association in Chicago, who was neighbors actually of the Obamaís. When he was about to be elected, her whole neighborhood was cut off. That was when I was living male. After my transition ... 
AJ: And you were living in Chicago at the time. 
SH: Yes, maíam. I was going to Loyola. 
AJ: OK. 
SH: But after my transition, I donít take for granted nor do I deny that I have lighter skin than most Puerto Ricans and I canít deny that that would have been an advantage for my employment going forward, which is really sad, because I look at my life and I look at people and Iím like, you know ÅEthereís a lot of competition out there and especially within minorities. You see people give up on their hopes and their dreams and you see African American men dealing drugs or you see trans women becoming prostitutes. We all have goals and we all have things we want to pay for, and so whoís at fault really? But when I got out of treatment I went to go interview for jobs and such and I worked at Burger King for two or three days, but in the neighborhood it was in Iím like, ìI cannot be here with make-up,ÅEplus they had the restriction of only natural make-28 up and I wasnít comfortable with that. 
AJ: Right. 
SH: But H&M, a retail clothing company, theyíre very pro-trans, they even have trans models in their organization, and I have a friend that was a store manager there. It was a lot of labor for a little amount of work and I wasnít feeling it and it was stressing me out. So then I moved on to Nordstrom and I actually applied for various positions. I showed up to my interview, the girl in HR who met us at the door ÅEshe greeted the genetic woman, she did not greet me. She walked with that girl, I walked behind. I was due to interview for womenís designer and I interviewed for menís furnishings. I was not contacted about my interview and when I called the department manager in menís furnishings, he reached back out to me because he wasnít the person that interviewed me and he just, no second interview, just told me I didnít get the job. I advocated for myself and called a different contact in HR and I said, ìYou know, Iím a little concerned about how I was treated in my interview process because I was supposed to interview for this and I wasnít.ÅE And so, I just kind of stirred the pot a little bit. And then loÅEand behold, Iím working in fine jewelry and watches. 
AJ: Oh really. 
SH: Yeah, itís seasonal. Yeah, so I could have ran away with the thought that they donít want a trans woman there, but I pushed it and it worked. I thought I was the first person at Nordstrom at the Mall of America to be hired, but I think somebody told me that somebody in their history, at that location, that I was not the first trans woman. I actually experienced some ... 
AJ: I have a friend who is trans who used to work at Nordstrom Rack but thatís a little ÅEI mean, it was at the Mall of America too. 
SH: OK, yeah. But some of my trans girlfriend peers, they were throwing some shade that I actually posted on making history because I was working at Mall of America. Theyíre like, ìGirl, please, youíre not doing ...ÅE And Iím like, ìNo, I only posted that,ÅEbecause they thought I wasnít being humble, and Iím like, ìI posted that because I truly thought I was the first trans girl to be hired there.ÅE They took issue with that. Theyíre just like, ìKnow your place, girl, youíre not a ... ÅE 
AJ: Oh, wow. 
SH: But I donít listen, I donít subscribe to that. Everybody has their roles and yes I am a pioneer. 
AJ: Absolutely. 
SH: As scary as it sometimes can be, I have things to get done. It was funny, because I was watching I am Cait, you know ... Iím indifferent about Caitlyn Jenner. At one time I was very envious about the fact that she could transition so easily because of money. 
AJ: Itís a lot to be envious of. She was able to transition in a way that not very many of us get the opportunity to do. 
SH: Yeah. And so ... 
AJ: And publicly, on the cover of magazines and everything. 
SH: Yeah, and the family she is related to and such. I donít know if she would have received such acceptance. I had a roommate at my sober house and sheís like, ìI donít know why youíre watching her, sheís such an idiot.ÅE And I wasnít watching the show because of Caitlyn Jenner, I was watching the show to try to hear from all the other trans women about the trans experience. For the past year, I have been in trans boot camp. 
AJ: So you pretty much came out at the same time as Caitlyn Jenner. 
SH: A little bit, maybe. I actually am grateful to her because I think she really kind of paved some road for this to be OK. The controversy kind of opened up the doors for this to be an open topic. Everybody is entitled to their political beliefs, everybody is entitled to the way they do their trans. When I came out, when I realized that I was trans, I said I am not going to attack other women for how they look and berate them for how they choose to do their ... how they run their game, and Iím not going to do to trans women ÅEthereís too much pain and challenges that face us as it is. I learned in the documentary, Gentrification, the rates of suicide and substance abuse and violence. And so itís a little too sensitive and serious of a situation right now in our society for there to be more hate. Gnarls Barkley said, ìHurt people hurt people.ÅE 
AJ: Thatís true. 
SH: Yeah. 
AJ: Gnarls Barkley, just spell that. G-n-a-r-l-s. 
SH: Yeah, heís great. Heís like a prophet. 
AJ: Barkley, B-a-r-k-l-e-y. 
SH: L-e-y, yeah. 
AJ: Hurt people hurt people. 
SH: They do. 
AJ: Thatís very true. What have been some of the joys? 
SH: Some of the joys ... yeah, Iím not used to doing interviews, I apologize for not doing this right. 
AJ: No, thatís OK ÅEyouíre doing it absolutely right. 
SH: Thank you. Some of the joys ... can I say one more thing about employment? 
AJ: Yes, please. Iím sorry. 
SH: No, itís OK. I just think itís important. So, I have a very admirable work history with my admin stuff as well as serving. I am friends with the Director of Diversity for a company in town, Buffalo Wild Wings, and I went to an interview there for serving. I waited in their lobby, as myself ÅEas Sayuri, in a navy blue suit, very professional, with a resume holder. I waited 45-50 minutes to be greeted by a manager during non-rush hours. As time progressed, my stomach got more butterflies and more anxiety the further it got on the clock. They did not have my resume, they did not remember that they scheduled it ÅEnothing. And never returned my call. That would have not ever, ever happened if I had showed up as the genetic gender that I was born as ÅEI know it. If I had shown up as Damien, which is my former name, I would have been in there right away because they would have saw power and sit on down. It really, really baffled me. But I actually ... thatís been the anxiety and the thing that I really try to avoid. Iím very thankful for my job because my employers want me there and it feels so good, even though that shouldnít be the case, to say, ìIím grateful that you want me and I donít take my job for granted.ÅE But with being an oppressed minority group, eyes are on me so if I do something or I have to watch my actions now, ìIs she stealing something?ÅE I was accused of being on drugs while Iím in recovery at another place, another restaurant. 
AJ: Wow. 
SH: So I get it now, I really get it ÅEbecause I was able to use, even though I am Puerto Rican and on a minority status, my appearance doesnít say that. But now I truly understand what it feels like to be a group thatís misunderstood by the dominant group, I really do. Some of the joys, my co-3 workers at Nordstrom told me I was like a work of art. One of the main joys is that people within my network and in my community, only know me as Sayuri. I really like that. 
AJ: Thatís a beautiful thing. 
SH: Yeah, itís really nice. 
AJ: And they respect you as Sayuri? 
SH: They do. 
AJ: Do you come out to people as transgender? 
SH: I do, Iím a tranny. I own that. I know that back in the day people would find that word derogatory, but Iím a tranny. I had somebody tell me trans ... thatís not to be used, and Iím like, ìWell, thatís you ÅEIím a tranny, honey. Get it.ÅE I love that word because I found it ÅEI found me, Iím free. 
AJ: This is a big issue, you know this is a big issue. I come down on the side of historically itís a word that has been used endearingly in our community ÅEsisters called each other trannys and bitches. But, I know that the word comes out of the porn industry ... 
SH: Oh does it? I didnít know that. 
AJ: Yeah. Trannys and he/shes and boy/girls and what is ...? 
SH: She/male. 
AJ: And then RuPaul, who you mentioned earlier, sort of got into trouble with the community about the word and a lot of younger, predominantly younger and, I think, white ÅEletís just be real, white trans-identified women were like, ìNo, tranny is bad and donít ever use it, itís going to pull you apart.ÅE But you embrace the word? 
SH: I love it, I love it. I will ... I will say, ìHello, tranny here.ÅE ìHi, how you doing?ÅE I donít ... Iím a person of truth. 
AJ: So you donít call other transgender women trannys? 
SH: Uh-uh, no. Uh-uh. 
AJ: You just refer to yourself. 
SH: I do. I own it, I love it. I think itís great. Now on the flip, if somebody called me a cross dresser, the record would screech. Iíd be like ... 
AJ: Roll back the tape. 
SH: Yes. That is way different. I love feeling good and looking good and being on point and being fierce, but from my understanding there is an attraction and an arousal that comes with men who prefer to cross dress and it doesnít have to do with their gender identity. So I would have no problem taking time hitting the punch clock on my day to say, ìWhat did you ...? Excuse me? No, honey, Iím transgender.ÅE And when somebody says ... I had a man approach me, of Muslim faith, but the poor man was intoxicated and stuff, he thought I was a lesbian and then he thought I was a man. I said, ìHoney, Iím not a man, I have titties, but I will fight you like a man, you better watch yourself.ÅE And then I said, ìAnd speaking about men, why are you standing in the middle of the street intoxicated? You need to get some help.ÅE I really love the idea of people getting along, but itís within my core and within my nature and identity, to stand up for myself. No matter how big you are, no matter how you think youíre making me scared, something changes in me and I will let you know I will go toe-to-toe with you. I donít engage with kids if theyíre being silly and stuff. I really donít like to shout or speak loudly in public places to where Iím no longer able to feminize my voice as best as I know how to. I think that clocks me the most. 
AJ: Your voice? 
SH: Yeah, because I think the best I can do is probably about there ÅEyeah. I never really cared about money, I only just like to go where I want to go, eat where I want to eat, and do what I want to do, until I found out I was trans. Then it was $7000 for the trach shave and the voice modifications, $6000 for my bottom surgery. Ironically, Iíve always really made good money and I have a little bit of anxiety coming back to the corporate world and doing administrative assisting work, executive assisting work because of being trans ÅEIím a little scared. 
AJ: Yeah, thatís understandable. 
SH: Yeah. 
AJ: Wow. So you kind of talked about some of the challenges, and you talked about some of the joys ... 
SH: I had a guy tell me I looked like a movie star on the bus. 
AJ: Really? 
SH: Yeah, yeah. 
AJ: Which movie star? 
SH: I donít know, he was probably just doing a pick-up line. 
AJ: OK, but that made you feel good? 
SH: It did, it did. I had a woman say to me while I was waiting for my hormones, ìYou look better than me and Iím a woman. You know how to do make-up better than me and Iím a girl.ÅE 
AJ: Oh wow. 
SH: But she thought she was giving me a compliment. 
AJ: What do you think of that statement? 
SH: Thatís not cool, thatís not cool. I also had a guy ... so I was recently seeing ... 
AJ: Yeah, it sort of negates the fact that you are a woman. 
SH: It does. At first ... itís just so funny because my trans has evolved. At first I thought I was OK with the mixed genitalia ÅEyou know, breasts and male ... Iím like, ìOh, I can be a hybrid, like from The Fifth Element the movie.ÅE Iím futuristic, thatís cool. Things werenít a problem until they became a problem, and everybody has the right to choose where they are within their transition, but I do plan to fully transition. I didnít think about it until I started dating an entirely heterosexual male and his favorite thing to do was perform oral sex on a female, so then Iím like ... things didnít become a problem until they became a problem. And for me, personally, it just doesnít fit for my life anymore. I know that itís right for me because if somebody asked me to go do it right now, get in the limo and go down to the hospital, I would ÅEwithout fear. Iím not afraid to do it and I really actually canít wait. 
AJ: So the only thing holding you back is the money? 
SH: Yeah, the money. 
AJ: So, you mentioned hormones, so you do hormonal therapy? 
SH: Yeah, Iíve been on them for a year. 
AJ: OK, any other medical interventions? 
SH: I got my nose done, February 1st, by the University of Minnesota. 
AJ: OK, nice. 
SH: Yeah, that was the toughest thing Iíve ever been through. 
AJ: Thatís kind of painful, isnít it? 
SH: Yeah, they did a rib graft. They took a piece of my rib bone and cartilage and put it in my nose because I had a deviation within my septum so they had to re-build it completely and feminize it a little bit. 
AJ: Cool. No implants today? 
SH: No, Iíve just got hormones for my boobies ... or, I mean, I have boobies from my hormones. I went to the plastic surgeon because I was mis-lead and thought Aramark actually covered breast augmentation, because Nordstrom covers both, but he said he would only be able to give me 150cc right now. He was insistent on it being under muscle and not over muscle and Iím like, ìI donít want something under my muscle, I want it over,ÅEbut he said it just looks better. But that would have only given me like a high B and if you think ... thatís not worth the $1200 right now. Iím blessed with some pretty good response from hormones. I have an A cup and I just wear a push-up and I do me, itís good enough. Iím so glad ... 
AJ: Yeah, youíre a petite lady. 
SH: Yeah. I have a strong personality, I would like a low C. I want power tits. ìIím sorry, did you just say no.ÅE 
AJ: Oh, funny. So but you would seek full SRS, sexual reassignment surgery? 
SH: Yeah. For me, right now, ironically I get a pretty prominent Adamís Apple from my father. Voice modification with the stitches or with the cut ÅEyou know, excision or incision, or the stitches and with the trach shave, that is the most important for me right now. I really want that so bad. Itís a lot of work to feminize your voice, I have to do it on and off and towards the end of the day at work Iím really sick of it. If Iím frustrated and I need to vocalize my concerns to my direct reports at my employment, I canít do it in a feminized voice. When Iím really speaking passionately, itís really hard for me to keep on that. When I speak at various meetings or institutions and stuff, in the recovery community, I canít do it the whole time. I will get excited and I will get passionate, itís a lot of work. 
AJ: Yeah, and I think people actually respect you more when youíre using your natural voice. 
SH: Oh really? 
AJ: I really do. Not you, particularly, Iím talking generally. 
SH: Oh yeah, yeah, yeah. Because I used to actually compensate like this and I tried to really ... 
AJ: Butch it up. 
SH: Yeah, as much as possible, and I was a very angry person. 
AJ: Have you ever been married? 
SH: I have not. 
AJ: Any children? 
SH: No, donít want none ÅEno kids for me. Estrogen gave me the unexpected interest in babies. ìOh, can I hold your baby?ÅE And Iím like, ìWait, thatís not me.ÅE I was with a man for three to four years, we were kids. I was 24, he was or something like that. He had graduated college and moved to California to work for Apple headquarters. I was in love but we didnít get along and it wasnít meant to be. Iíve been single since, years. We had rings and stuff but we werenít legally married. My biggest life goal is to be married. I already know what ring I want, I know what china I want. 
AJ: So what labels have you identified as throughout your life? 
SH: As far as gender identity and sexuality? 
AJ: Yeah. 
SH: Queer ÅEthat I really embraced and loved. 
AJ: How do you define queer? 
SH: Queer, I would define as an umbrella term where people donít like the binary simplicity of like youíre sure youíre gay or this and that. I remember I would watch porn, like I really like male/female porn ÅElove it, thatís my thing, thatís what gets my goat. 
AJ: Right, so heterosexual porn basically. 
SH: Yeah, yeah ÅEtotally love heterosexual porn, never watch gay porn. I couldnít identify with it, and it wasnít 50/50, thatís what I would say a bi- person is but thatís just my conditioning from society. So bi- didnít fit, straight didnít fit, gay didnít fit, and then all of a sudden in 2010 I found queer and I liked how it sounded. I said, ìQueer, Iím queer ÅEyeah, thatís what I am.ÅE 
AJ: Wow. 
SH: I tried to be straight as a male, I tried ... like 18-24 I was always trying to shift my identity and it was really painful. I actually probably harmed myself by those attempts. 
AJ: So you would date women? 
SH: Yeah, actually ... that coming out process in 2012-13, I actually slept with women like once every couple of years. 
AJ: Once every couple years. 
SH: I mean every couple of years I was involved with a girl, a couple times. There was an assistant manager of mine who worked at the mall when I was a mall rat, when I was like 18, and our thing ÅEwe would get a little drunk, eat pizza rolls, and have sex in the back of my condos where I lived. Go figure that out. 
AJ: Oh, funny. Has there been a specific person or organization that has had a tremendous impact on you coming out? You talked about this woman at 15, this trans woman. Tell me a little bit more about her. 
SH: Oh gosh. She would be no, but this brings me to my exposure. When I was 12-years-old, Grace Foster ÅEGrace Jones, she was actually the actual stunt double, her name is Grace Foster, she was the stunt double for Grace Jones. 
AJ: Really? 
SH: Yeah, in Vamp and Conan the Destroyer. She also appears ... Iím not too firm, forgive me Grace, God rest your soul, Iím not too firm of the credibility of those two statements, but for a fact she in the movie Without You Iím Nothing by Sandra Bernhard. She is a back-up singer, sheís the thinner one in Ainít No Mountain High Enough and I met her at 12. 
AJ: Wow. Grace Foster. 
SH: Yes, Grace Foster. Fierce, like $400 weave, beautiful body ÅEyou could have the most racist closed-minded white man and as soon as he sees her, heís just like stuck and heís drooling. And sheís like, ìYou want to see? You want to feel? Huh?ÅE Serving it. I was just amazed. 
AJ: Was she a queen? 
SH: She was trans. She was non-op trans. 
AJ: Wow. 
SH: Yeah, the phoniest person I ever met in my life. The most amazing person Iíve ever met. 
AJ: How did you meet Grace? 
SH: Well, I met Grace because this guy named Beau Clay, who also has moved on since, he moved from LA ÅEthey were part of the peanuts and rage culture, the Nina Hagen/Grace Jones era in LA. They were doing that scene. And he had relocated to Michigan to open up a mystical pagan bookstore. 
AJ: Oh wow. 
SH: So I met her through him. I didnít know she was trans until I was about and that was also the time that I found out that she was HIV position. This was just at the tipping point of the drugs getting good, to where people were surviving. She didnít make it, she was losing her hair, she was going through dementia. Yeah, so she passed away when I was 21. But I remember her looking out the window of this bookstore and she was upset and she was crying and I didnít know why. I asked her, I said, ìGrace, are you OK?ÅE And she said, ìItís just the hormones.ÅE Iím a kid but ... and then I came back downstairs and somebody who later on became my godfather, he told me what was going on. I remember the church bell, or the bank bell, in that small town ringing. It was really hard for me but she ... her strength and her fierceness ... I embrace it. I see her as an angel that is part of my life. 
AJ: So let me ask you this, what do you think the relationship is between the L, the G, the B, and the T? I know youíve got some strong feelings about this ÅEtalk to me, honey. 
SH: Yes. I am not scared of controversy, thatís just who I am as a person. And people might get a little hate on Caitlyn Jenner at me about this, but just through reflecting and through my own process for the past year, I donít understand why the T, because the T represents transgender, that is gender identity, I do not understand why that is included within the LGBT acronym. I understand that there are alternative lifestyles but I think the concept or the situation that one is sexual orientation and one is gender identity impacts my life and my ability to navigate freely within society. I think itís just a matter of circumstance that that occurred. As people may or may not know within history, the transgender community at Stonewall in the Queens, they were there fighting in the trenches of the forefront. So we have to honor that and such, however people ... I recently went through a situation where a man is too afraid to tell our mutual friends that we are lovers because he is worried they will judge him and think he is gay or bi- because he is with a trans female. My understanding of the situation, which I was so confused, because before him I was dating an ex-Marine and heís like ... I told him, ìYou know I havenít fully transitioned yet, right?ÅE Before we got too into it, and he said, ìNo, I didnít know.ÅEAnd he was so chill about it and everything, but he was left having to wrap his head around it and at the end of the day he decided no ÅEeven though it sounded like we were going to date and continue to see each other. But the stigma around trans women, people will automatically assume that a straight man is, like I said, gay or bi- because heís dating a trans woman, however this tranny on YouTube, she laid it down into three categories ... 
AJ: Haha, this tranny. 
SH: Sheís beautiful. Her name is something Ramos, or something like that. Sheís got red hair and stuff, but she makes all these various videos of her different experiences and different categories and such as a trans woman with guys and why trans women wonít date men who have been with trans women before, certain relationships she had, but she laid it down like the types of men that date trans women. And thereís three categories: thereís the down-low dick-6 hungry boys that donít want anybody to know but they start with trans women and may or may not eventually come out as gay, but they are in the closet; and then there are the tranny chasers, the people who actively seek trans women or trans men and are very interested in interacting with a trans womanís pre-op genitalia; and then thereís the third category that are straight men, they are not into penis, they just so happen to come across a fierce trans girl like Sayuri and like her for her hotness, her body, her soul and how she affects them. That has been, really, such a beautiful confidence builder for me because both men that Iíve been involved with since coming out, that are of any depth ... I mean, I had some sexual experiences at first, but one was a tranny chaser and thatís just not my thing. 
AJ: Sure. 
SH: I would like to find a man that doesnít objectify trans women, that is actually seeking a trans partner, but my truth is that I will be fully transitioning so donít get used to ... 
AJ: Right, donít get used to this. 
SH: Yeah. It makes me uncomfortable when someone wants to perform oral sex on me, being pre-20 op. Iím not into it, I donít like it. Itís not that I donít like my genitalia, it just doesnít fit what Iím doing any more. And so, the one thing that I really, really want people to understand, and it was hard for me to realize too ... I went to a trans woman who has fully transitioned, sheís post-op, and Iím like, ìThis is stressing me out, how do I have sex and blah, blah, blah?ÅE I was able to, with the first guy, stay fully tucked and we had intercourse with him behind. I was able to stay tucked and I did not feel guilty about that, I didnít feel ashamed about that. I wanted him to be comfortable because Iím a hetero, normative, straight woman and I want to have a man ... I mean, see ÅEI guess even if I was with a bisexual man, Iím monogamous so youíre not going around messing around with no men, weíre together. So either way, it just ... my truth is my truth and it may change tomorrow, who knows. 
AJ: Who knows. So I loved your response to the LGBT issue. What do you think the agenda for the transgender community should be going forward? You said you consider yourself an activist and a feminist, social justice minded. 
SH: I do, absolutely. I didnít see myself ... this is a pretty recent development within my journey, within my road. My passion is speaking about ... you know, the mental health stigma in the country and the stigma around white anxiety. I really donít like it when people say that minorities are discriminated against and youíre being a victim. You know what? Hereís the thing, if you read Howard Zinnís American History of the United States you would see two words together ... 
AJ: Peopleís History of the United States. 
SH: Peopleís History of the United States, you would see two words together, thank you for your correction, white slaves. White slaves. Nowhere else will you see that. And they try to put a little buffer on it ÅEindentured servants. Honey, those people were poor, they were digging up graves in order to survive because they didnít learn how to cook from the Natives, they were slaves. And what had happened was Native men were getting with white girls, Black men were getting with Native girls ÅEit was a big old party back in those days and the forefathers did not want this conflict of interest so they insisted that white women needed to stay away from the Black men and the Native men and thatís what created this separation and segregation and this fear of people of color, because they wanted to not compromise their rule, their superiority. And so, hey you donít have to be worried that youíre somehow better, because really most ... nine times out of ten, your relatives were just as poor and in just as dire straits as the people who were forced into slavery. So no worry, you arenít no better. I think that would eliminate some anxiety around this whole boogey classism stuff. I think today, unfortunately, in our society with the cut-throat economy that we have, everybody is aspiring to hurry up and try to climb the ladder and nobody is ever going to get there ÅEthe people, theyíre not going to let you. 
AJ: Is there anything that I didnít ask you, Sayuri, that you feel like you absolutely have to say? 
SH: I feel really blessed to be living in present day to where I get to walk the streets without attack. I think there are probably other ... like, I read about a woman who was Brazilian who got her hair removed, who got her work messed up, and people are in danger in some other cultures and even in my country. The soul is eternal and I donít think itís based on gender. It may be just part of oneís evolution to transition, it doesnít even really matter why but itís ... Iím really grateful I get to experience this and sometimes it scares me. I mean, things didnít get real until the problem started, but I think thereís never been something to give me such a backbone as this, because Iím a sensitive person. Being transgender is definitely teaching me and conditioning me to not care what other people think. But in a way, in a healthy solution-minded way, I do care what people think. Letís talk about it. It baffles me ÅEI saw a man, completely muscular and everything, wearing a dress, no wig, anything when I was working at H&M. I looked ÅEthatís courage right there. I couldnít do that. 
AJ: Which H&M were you working at? 
SH: Southdale Mall. This man was just running around like ... whoa. So, I have to admit as a person that I donít know if I could do that if I was in his shoes. I also ... I donít find myself courageous and brave. People tell me they have respect for me and they think Iím so brave and courageous, it doesnít feel that way to me because Iím just living my truth. Iím free. 
AJ: Wow, that is so, so, so powerful, Sayuri. Thank you. 
SH: Yeah, of course. Thank you, so much. 
AJ: Thank you for sharing, thank you for your honesty and humor. 
SH: Thank you. 
AJ: Until we meet again. All right. 
SH: All right, thank you. 