George Hoagland 
Narrator 
Andrea Jenkins 
Interviewer 
George Hoagland Interview 
Andrea Jenkins -AJ 
George Hoagland -GH AJ: Hello. 
GH: Hi Andrea. AJ: My name is Andrea Jenkins, and I am the oral historian for The Transgender Oral History Project 
at the Tretter Collection at the University of Minnesota Libraries. Uhm, today is August 24th 
and… 2017. And, uhm, I am on the campus of the University of Minnesota. Uhm, today we’re 
with George Hoagland. How you doing today George? GH: I am great. AJ: Yeah? GH: It is so nice to talk to you. AJ: Oh wow. Thank you very much. It’s really my deep honor and pleasure to be speaking with you 
today too. So, uhm, I’m going to ask you to state your name, spell your name so we just make 
sure we have the correct spelling, uhm, tell me your, uh, gender identity as you affirm it today, 
uh, your gender assigned at birth, and your pronouns. GH: Uh, okay! So my name is George Hoagland. Uh, first name is G.E.O.R.G.E. 
AJ: Like Washington? GH: Like Washington. AJ: [Laughs]. GH: Like Jefferson. Uhm, last name is Hoagland. And that’s spelled H.O.A.G.L.A.N.D. Uhm, my gender 
identity is androgynous and I put that under the umbrella of genderqueer. AJ: Mhm. GH: Uhm, and pronouns I use all of them. Uhm, he, she, and they are the most popular. AJ: Okay. 
GH: And I think, uhm, based on feedback primarily from my students, they seems to be the one that 
is used on me most. For myself, I, I use the first person which is I. AJ: I, yes. 
GH: So people like they so I’m gonna go with they. It’s a good one. 
George Hoagland Interview 
AJ: Alright, alright. Well, that’s interesting. So you, you cited your students… GH: Mhm. AJ: … as being really comfortable with they. What kind of students are you engaged with? GH: Uh, most recently I worked with students at the Minneapolis College of Art and Design. So these 
are students who are artists or artist types. Uhm, but before that, uhm, even as recently as last 
year, I worked at, uh, the University of Minnesota Duluth in the, uhm, Women, Gender, and 
Sexuality Studies Department. AJ: Oh wow. GH: And that is where I think the, the they really caught on so those students were very they- 
forward. AJ: Right. [Laughs]. GH: They really wanted to like include me in their group. 
AJ: They were they-forward. GH: [Laughs]. They were they-forward. Exactly. Yeah, so I’m embracing that. It feels good. AJ: So you’re a professor? GH: I am a professor. AJ: Cool. Uhm, what subject matters do you… instruct? 
GH: Gosh. Uhm, most of the time whenever I’m asked to. But when I get to choose my own, uhm, 
fields, I would say I am foremost a media studies person. That means I work in a variety of media 
fields. So… not on the production side but on the theoretical side. So more on the, the study of 
cinema… 
AJ: Sure. GH: … or the study of video games which is a new thing. Uhm, I also do QTIPOCI studies, so Queer, 
Trans, Intersex, People of Color, and Indigenous people studies. 
AJ: Wow. GH: Particularly in regard to media and media representations. I also do science and technology 
studies so it would be like the social effects of, a particular kind of technology on a group of 
people. Uhm, I also do performance studies. I used to do literary studies [laughs] in my spare 
time. The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies 
University of Minnesota George Hoagland Interview 
AJ: Oh wow. In your spare time. GH: Yeah, yeah, yeah. So a bunch of stuff. I had interdisciplinary training and I call upon that pretty 
much every day to tackle whatever thing I’m looking at. 
AJ: So, just, this is just a little technical piece but can you repeat Q… GH: So it’s QTIPOCI. AJ: POCI. GH: So you could say “cutie-poci” is one way of saying it or “cutie-poc” if you wanna leave off the I. AJ: Right. 
GH: Uhm, but it’s sort of an outgrowth of like what we called in the past QPOC. AJ: So the first I is… GH: Intersex. AJ: Intersex. The second I is indigenous. GH: Yes. 
AJ: Sorry about that world. Uh, I usually remember to turn off my phone but… GH: See this is, this is a media studies moment. AJ: [Laughs]. Right. GH: Like we’re always connected. AJ: Exactly. 
GH: [Laughs]. AJ: [Laughs]. You can go on and discuss that a bit more. I’m sure you have already turned off your, 
uh, human communication device. 
GH: No, no. I haven’t, but it… I don’t expect anything to go off. AJ: Okay. Very good. Uhm, George, tell me what is your earliest memory in life? GH: Oh goodness, my earliest memory in life. Well, I don’t know if it’s earliest but I can remember 
early moments or early sort of sensations I guess you would say, right? So, I remember primary 
colors. That’s probably like the most aesthetic-ly shaping thing in, in my life. 
The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies 
University of Minnesota George Hoagland Interview AJ: The movie? GH: No, gosh, no I was in college when that movie came out. No, I mean the colors, like red and blue 
and yellow and green. Like those colors have always been, uh, sort of imprinted on me so my 
memories of seeing those colors are pretty vivid, and there isn’t any like event associated with 
them. I just always, yeah, always like them. So like the colors, uhm, in my neighborhood. I 
always notice the colors in the neighborhood. AJ: Wow. GH: Yeah, I know. I’m weird, but I’m okay with it, you know? [Laughs]. AJ: No, it’s cool. It’s your, it’s your memory. There’s no judgement there. Uh, where did you grow 
up? GH: Uh, I grew up in San Diego for the most part. Well, yeah, I spent all of my, my, uhm, childhood 
there. Uhm, but my family moved around because we were military. So I was born in, on a naval 
base in Japan in Yokosuka, which is the name of, of the city. 
AJ: Yokosuka. GH: Yokosuka. AJ: Do you know how to spell it? GH: So it’s Y.O.K.O.S.U.K.A. AJ: Mhm. 
GH: So I think, uh, people who’s primary language is English would probably say Yokosuka. AJ: Uhuh. GH: Right. But it’s, uh, in Japanese you’d probably say like Yokosuka or something like that. Uhm, so 
it is a beautiful place. Probably also had a lot of, uhm, impact on how I imagine like, uh, sensory 
experiences. It’s a very lush place. Uhm, and then we stayed there until I was just about three. 
Something like that. Then we went to, uhm, Washington State, uhm, to another Navy base there 
in Bremerton. And then my little sister was born, and then we moved to San Diego, and then I 
grew up there. So we moved to San Diego when I was like four. So, yeah, and I lived there from 
four to maybe twenty-six. Something like that. AJ: Wow. GH: So… and a bunch of different places around San Diego so it’s not like a… San Diego has—is like a 
town made up of millions of other towns. The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies 
University of Minnesota George Hoagland Interview 
AJ: Right. I have been there a couple of times, and it was kind of odd… GH: [Laughs]. AJ: … that is was like, there are these little towns but they’re all sort of connected. GH: Yeah. AJ: I mean, I guess, most places would call them neighborhoods. 
GH: Right, right, yeah. So they, yeah, they don’t call them neighborhoods there. They’re actually like 
just parts of the city… AJ: Yeah. 
GH: … so I would say, so, you know, it’s— AJ: They all have their own distinct identity… GH: They do. AJ: … and culture. GH: They do. Yeah. So if you’re from San Diego you would probably not say I’m from San Diego. You 
would say I’m from the part of town that you’re actually from. So the parts of town that I am 
from are Chula Vista, which is a separate city. AJ: Mhm. GH: And then, uhm, Pacific Beach, which is, uh, beach town. And then Coronado which is in Isthmus. 
So on the other side of the bay. And then… so many places.. Mira Mesa… AJ: [Laughs]. GH: … uh, Torrey Pines, I don’t know, a bunch of places. AJ: Bunch of places. GH: Yeah, I know. 
AJ: Wow, that’s beautiful. GH: It is beautiful. AJ: One of the most temperate places in the country… GH: [Laughs]. 
The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies 
University of Minnesota George Hoagland Interview AJ: … that’s for sure. GH: It is beautiful and temperate. 
AJ: Essentially the world. GH: Yeah. AJ: [Laughs]. Uhm, eighty degrees and sunny almost year round. GH: Pretty much year round except when it’s like smogy, and then it’s just eighty degrees and dark. AJ: Really? 
GH: Yeah, yeah. AJ: Uhm, southern California. Uhm, so what was it like in elementary school? GH: Elementary school… was mostly pretty fun. I mean, I sort of, uhm, uh, got to be my most fun 
self, at least the self that I like the most at school, which is not surprising that I then went on to 
spend my entire life in schools in various capacities so elementary school was great. Uhm, I was 
a really early reader so I don’t remember learning to read. I just sort of feel like I always could. AJ: Mhm. GH: I know that that’s not true. [Laughs]. I don’t remember when I learned to read. AJ: There’s lots of children who are by the age three they’re reading… 
GH: Yeah. AJ: … full sentences and comprehending. GH: Mhm. Yeah, I spent time with a kid this summer who is two and a half. AJ: Uhuh. GH: And she’ll be reading by next year for sure, yeah. So, I think it’s probably common. 
AJ: I don’t know if it’s common. I’m not trying to take away your brilliant genius… GH: [Laughs]. AJ: … but it does happen. The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies 
University of Minnesota George Hoagland Interview 
GH: That’s right. That’s great. That’s like, yeah. It’s like, uhm, what was I going to say? Uhm, have my 
genius archived. AJ: [Laughs]. 
GH: [Laughs]. Oh my goodness. Uhm, no elementary school was, was really, I thought it was pretty 
fun so, uhm… AJ: Mhm, cool. 
GH: … I got in trouble a lot. AJ: Yeah. GH: I didn’t pay attention. Also unsurprising. AJ: Hm. GH: Yeah, but it was generally pretty good. I got in trouble for talking in class and probably for being 
black. That’s my guess. AJ: Hm. Yeah. GH: Uhm, but, uh… 
AJ: Cause San Diego is not the most diverse community. GH: It is diverse but it is segregated. AJ: Okay. GH: So, uh, depending on where we lived at any given time would determine like what the racial 
makeup of any school was. AJ: Mhm. GH: So I think I went to like maybe four or five different elementary schools so they were all pretty, 
uh, different. Uhm, but in terms of people of color like San Diego was pretty heavenly— pretty 
heavenly— it is heavenly for people who, maybe, for people who identify as, uhm, Asian or 
Pacific Islander… AJ: Uhuh. GH: Asian American, API. 
AJ: Yeah. The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies 
University of Minnesota George Hoagland Interview 
GH: Uhm, so there’s big populations. AJ: There’s a lot. GH: And South Asians too. AJ: Mhm. GH: So I went to school. The coolest kids that I went to school with were Filipino. 
AJ: Ah. GH: I still think they’re the coolest kids. AJ: Yeah. GH: Yeah. Hands down. AJ: Hands down. Yeah, they tend to have sort of, uh, a soul food diet. 
GH: Yep. AJ: [Laughs]. GH: Mhm. AJ: Uh, and some pretty close proximity to, uh, African American culture. GH: Yeah. Yeah, yeah. I mean, you know. They, they… 
AJ: The Filipino folks that I have experienced… GH: Me, me too, right, so they’re like, yeah, wherever you would find black kids you’d also find 
Filipino kids in, in my, in schools I went to. So that was cool. 
AJ: Uhm, what was home life like? GH: Oh, gosh, home was a mix of things. AJ: You’re a Navy family right? GH: Yeah, so we started off as a, as a Navy family, and that was another, uhm, it’s not idiosyncratic 
for other people in the military but particularly for the military in the ‘70s when things were 
pretty, I don’t know, uhm, the military was pretty generous for, for families and you could have 
all of your needs met… AJ: Right. George Hoagland Interview GH: … uhm, by the military. So we lived in military housing in some really nice neighborhoods. AJ: Mhm. 
GH: Those are no longer military neighborhoods in, in San Diego, uhm, unsurprisingly. Uhm, and we 
firmly believe, I think my parents firmly believe, that we were solid middle class cause we looked 
like everybody else on the block. AJ: Sure. GH: We had the same houses, went to the same church… AJ: Mhm. 
GH: … you know, shopped at the same places on the base, uhm, parents had the same jobs. It was 
very, uhm… AJ: Was your mom or dad in the military? 
GH: So my dad started off as, uh, enlisted, uhm, in the… I’m not sure what year he entered but it was 
right after high school. So, it was, in some ways kind of like a golden opportunity for him. AJ: Mhm. 
GH: So he rose up through the ranks and then by the time all of us kids were born he was a petty 
officer and then he retired as a chief petty officer… AJ: Oh wow. 
GH: … which is pretty much as far as you could go as an enlisted, uh, person. So, yeah, we were, we 
just look the same as all the other kids so I grew up with white friends and Hispanic friends and, 
you know, there was always a mix of kids… AJ: Mhm. GH: … around. Uhm, home life in that sense was great as long as we were military identified so that’s 
a kind of— I think of it as a really socialist way of living, you know? AJ: Mhm. GH: Uhm, which was really cool but then than my parents separated when I was about eight. And 
then my sisters and I moved in, we lived with our mom exclusively and that’s when we moved 
into the projects after that. 
AJ: Okay. 
George Hoagland Interview 
GH: So, which is also like it’s very common that that happens. AJ: Yeah. GH: So, uhm, we moved to the projects things became a lot less inclusive I guess, right? And the 
white kids in the projects were like the minorities and like the special people. AJ: Oh wow. GH: Yeah. Yeah. AJ: The others. GH: The others right? Yeah. Yeah. The white kids in the projects. 
AJ: It’s interesting. GH: So that was from— or age eight until, I lived at home until eighteen. I moved out at eighteen. So, 
uhm, home life generally… it was, I don’t know, I guess, uhm… there were lots of tough things 
but then there were also lots of awesome sweet things. AJ: Mhm. GH: So a pretty good mix of stuff. 
AJ: Right. GH: Uhm, home is where I, I learned that being weird is cool. AJ: [Laughs]. Okay, yeah. GH: So, so that was, yeah, my, my parents were, were very, were very kind in that regard cause they 
had no idea what to do with me so I got to like do stuff that my siblings just didn’t get to do. So 
that was cool. 
AJ: Are you the oldest? GH: No, I’m the middle kid. I have an older sister and a younger sister. AJ: Okay. GH: Yeah. Who both still live in San Diego. AJ: Is that right? 
GH: Mhm. They moved away, and they moved back. 
George Hoagland Interview 
AJ: Yeah, it’s kind of hard to leave San Diego… GH: It is. AJ: … I would imagine. GH: Yeah, yeah. AJ: [Laughs]. 
GH: Unless someone like tells you get out... [Laughs]. AJ: [Laughs]. Right. GH: … you wind up staying, and I kind of feel like I wore out my welcome in that town. AJ: Oh boy. GH: Yeah. 
AJ: Well, let me ask you this. When did you begin to realize or determine that… I know you talked 
about sort of your parents accepting your weirdness… GH: Mhm. 
AJ: … quote. [Laughs]. Uhm, that your gender wasn’t exactly like all the kids around you. GH: Yeah. Oh gosh, I’m pretty certain preschool. I mean, cause that was the time when I started 
hanging out with other kids from, you know, all around and not just the kids on my block. Uhm, 
yeah, I, I think I, it’s the feeling that, you know, as a social person I always knew that I was 
different. AJ: Mhm. GH: To myself it never seemed even notable. AJ: Right. GH: So for, you know, uhm, you know, if, looking back I could say for a person who was going to 
grow up to be an intellectual that seems like a reasonable path of development. AJ: Mhm. GH: Uhm, but at the time as a kid it, it was surprising to know how different that I was. 
AJ: Hm. 
George Hoagland Interview 
GH: Right? It was, you know, you’ve… I would find, I would find reminders of being different in 
places that I didn’t expect, you know. So, okay, let me… AJ: Like an example. 
GH: Yeah. [Laughs]. Like an example. So, okay, so next door we lived in a yellow house because my 
mom wanted the house painted yellow. AJ: Mhm. 
GH: And next door to us was this family, and I, I feel like they just had ten kids but I’m sure they 
didn’t. AJ: [Laughs]. Okay. 
GH: The kids were just like so free and wild, uhm, and one of the kids was my best friend. We were 
the same age. And this kid’s name was Chucky. AJ: Uhuh. [Laughs]. Chucky. 
GH: [Laughs]. Chucky from next door. So, uhm, this is a white family. Uhm, and they were very, you 
know, ‘70s surfer… AJ: Uhuh. 
GH: … you know, hippie military family, which there are a lot of those in, in San Diego. So these kids 
were always outside just running around doing whatever. AJ: Mhm. 
GH: You know, they had skateboards and trampolines, and we didn’t have that stuff in our house. AJ: Right. GH: So, uhm, I’d be playing with Chucky all of the time as much as I could. And it would be fine when 
it was just the two of us. AJ: Mhm. GH: But then if another boy would come around then it would be like, “Oh no. George,” and my 
name wasn’t George then, uhm, it would be like, “George, now you have to be the girl.” And I’d 
be like, “But I don’t, why should we do anything different than what we’re doing now?” AJ: Right. George Hoagland Interview 
GH: Uhm, and then [laughs] it was so funny. [Laughs]. And then, and then the other boy would be 
like, “Well, okay, uh, Chucky if you’re going to play with George then like, like, uh, George has to 
be your girlfriend then.” And I’d be like, “That doesn’t make any sense.” AJ: Yeah. Right. [Laughs]. GH: You know? And then Chucky would be like, “Okay.” AJ: Uhuh. [Laughs]. 
GH: So those kind of things would surprise me as a kid. AJ: Yeah. GH: All the time I’d be like, “What? That doesn’t make sense.” AJ: Mhm. GH: Uhm, yeah, I’m trying to think of examples like growing up. I think my parents definitely had 
what we would today call gender panic. AJ: Yeah. GH: Uhm, it was just poorly managed. [Laughs]. 
AJ: Yeah. GH: It just, they, they were very careful I think in, in, uhm, how they described me to other people 
but then at home, uh, was just always me. 
AJ: You were just George. GH: Yeah, yeah. AJ: Define gender panic. GH: Gender panic. AJ: Cause, I mean, I have some ideas about it but it’s a little more morbid than I’m thinking that 
you’re… GH: Right, right. Well, it gets worse over time, right? So when you’re a little kid your parents might 
say sometime like, in my case, “Oh, George is a tomboy.” Right? AJ: Yeah. 
George Hoagland Interview 
GH: And that’s an acceptable label especially for like afab people like I identify so, assigned female at 
birth people. AJ: Right. 
GH: So to be a tomboy is, is acceptable, right? Uhm, as you get older, uhm, especially like through 
puberty and into high school, uhm, there are like milestones that I think parents may want their 
kids to meet, right? So in my case my parents thought of milestones as like “Oh, you know, 
you’re going to, uh, uh, be a good Christian girl.” Right? That was very important to my parents. 
Uhm, and then, you’ll, you know, meet a man, get married, have kids, right? So that was sort of 
the path that they wanted, uh, all of us to be on. So myself and my two sisters. And my, uh, my 
mom in particular tried to manage that path in some, uh, I think, in some ways that were anxiety 
ridden for her, right? My dad was less involved. Uhm, but my mom, particularly after my parents 
split, my mom would do things, for example, like, uh, for every— we go school shopping, uhm, 
for every pair of pants I got I had to buy a dress, right? AJ: Hm. GH: And by the time I got to high school it was, “You need to wear a dress to school three days a 
week.” [Laughs]. Right? AJ: Wow. GH: Stuff like that, right? And it never stuck, right? She would make the, the rule or whatever. 
AJ: She would make the proclamation but… GH: Exactly. Yeah. But I would still… AJ: You would take off the dress. GH: Yeah, yeah, or not even that. I would just, you know, I would do it for like the day she said. AJ: Uhuh. 
GH: And then I would do something else. AJ: Revert back to your regular dress. GH: I mean, even so, like, I, I think I look great in a dress… AJ: Mhm. GH: … and the dress clearly didn’t, you know, change my identity in any way. [Laughs]. 
AJ: Right. Exactly. Yeah. 
George Hoagland Interview 
GH: Uhm, I actually really liked wearing dresses for, for certain things. AJ: Cool. GH: I mean, I still would if it was practical. AJ: Yeah. GH: Uhm, but yeah, so I think that’s the kind of like anxiety, particularly that, that my mom felt like, 
“Oh, there’s something, if George doesn’t stay on this path then these things aren’t going to 
happen.” But at the same time, uhm, uh, I think both my parents were very proud of me. AJ: Mhm. GH: My mom in particular. Uhm, and I think that that pride stayed intention about what goals I was 
going to achieve right so. AJ: Did you, uhm, stay in relationship with your father? GH: I did until actually fairly recently. So, uhm, my dad was always around when we were growing, 
uhm, which, I mean, even then we weren’t as, as kids we weren’t even really sure how, how, 
uhm, unusual that was. AJ: Mhm. 
GH: So my parents had a custody agreement that was every other weekend. And, uhm, my dad 
showed up every other weekend and stayed, never lived too far away… AJ: Mhm. 
GH: … was always around. Uhm, maybe not like the most involved parent in our day to day but he 
would always come around. AJ: But he was there. 
GH: Yeah. He was always there so, uhm, right now I forgot the question. [Laughs]. AJ: Yeah, no. The question was were you, were you, did you have relationship, that was the 
question. 
GH: Oh, yeah, yeah. AJ: But then you said up until recently. GH: Up until recently, right. So, uhm, uh, growing up things were reasonably okay. Uhm, I went to 
college. He was around still, you know, somewhat. We talked kind of regularly but I started to, 
uhm, express beliefs that were… he had a hard time reconciling them with his own faith. George Hoagland Interview AJ: Mhm. GH: And that only continued to get… our beliefs, well, our beliefs, I think, stayed the same. But his 
idea about what my beliefs were continued to change… AJ: Hm. GH: … over time right, uhm, to the point… 
AJ: Not in a positive way. GH: No, not in a positive way so, yeah, my, both of my parents, uhm, are, well my mom has since 
passed… 
AJ: Awe. GH: … but, uhm, my parents raised us in an evangelical, uh, Christian household so today I think it 
would be evangelical Christianity doesn’t look the same way as it did in the ‘70s. This is also in 
southern California so we hung out with a lot of white hippie Christians. AJ: Right. GH: And that was kind of like how, how we grew up. 
AJ: Uhuh. GH: Uhm, you know, the, the white guys with beards who played guitars. Like that was, yeah, that 
was, that was our family. 
AJ: Okay. They wore Birkenstocks and… GH: Yeah, yeah so everybody like we were the family that dressed up for church… AJ: Uhuh. GH: … but nobody else did. [Laughs]. So, uhm, uh, my dad and I had stayed in touch and were pretty 
regular communicators and very, you know, nice and gentle with each other until I was in grad 
school. So until I moved to Minnesota pretty much. Uhm, and through grad school like I tried to 
explain to him what I was doing, and he was really not quite sure what I was doing in Minnesota 
or why I moved so far away. AJ: Mhm. GH: Uhm, he knew that I was, uh, not straight. Uhm, he didn’t, still doesn’t really know what queer 
means but I had, you know, dated a bunch of women. Uhm, it’s not a bunch. 
George Hoagland Interview 
AJ: [Laughs]. GH: Some women. [Laughs]. AJ: It’s okay if you dated a bunch of women. GH: I didn’t date a bunch of women. AJ: Okay. 
GH: [Laughs]. There was like, I don’t know what the qualifier is but I’m sure it wasn’t a bunch. But I 
dated women, uhm, and he knew about it and he met many of them. And, you know, things 
were kind of cool. When I moved to Minnesota I think the gulf between our ideologies just really 
widened up cause we weren’t in close contact. 
AJ: Hm. GH: So he would ask me things like, you know, “Okay, you’ve been in grad school for like four years 
now. Like when are you going to do your residency?” And I’d be like, “Dad,” I was like, “You 
know, I’m not, it’s not, it’s a doctorate. It’s not an MD.” AJ: Right. GH: And he was like, “I don’t know what that means.” 
AJ: Okay. [Laughs]. GH: So he was like, “You’ve been in school all your life. Like when are you gonna get a job? What are 
you gonna do?” 
AJ: Uhuh. GH: And so along with those conversations, uh, came with, uhm, uh, his questioning my Christian 
beliefs, which I still hold very firmly. 
AJ: Okay. GH: So he would say like, “You know, well where are you going to church?” And I’d be like, “Well, I 
don’t go to church.” And he’d be like, “Okay, so what kind of, you know, uh, what are you 
doing?” And then from there our conversation devolved into like, you know, well, you know, 
“You know you need to repent for your sins, right?” And I’d be like, “What sins are we talking 
about dad?” AJ: Right. 
GH: And then he’d be like, “Well, now that you mention it,” right, he’s like, “you know your 
lifestyle.” And then I went like, “Oh. This right?” So it went downhill from there and I was just George Hoagland Interview 
like, “You know, you didn’t have a problem with my lifestyle before.” And he was like, “Well, 
you’re grown up now.” And I was like, “Oh.” So, unfortunately, I decided to stop talking to him 
cause he had gotten kind of mean about it, actually… AJ: Okay. GH: … right before I graduated with my PhD. AJ: Hm. 
GH: So I was like, “You know, I love ya but you’re mean so we’re not gonna… AJ: Right. GH: … talk so much anymore. So that’s how things have stand, stood for some time. And I, I love him 
deeply. I just haven’t talked to him in a while, and now it’s mostly because of like inertia, not 
because I don’t want to talk to him. AJ: Right. Yeah. [Laughs]. Life is like that. 
GH: Exactly. Yeah, yeah. So he’s old, and he has remarried. AJ: Mhm. GH: And his, uh, uhm, wife seems really nice. AJ: Mhm. GH: So I’m assuming he’s happy. 
AJ: So he’s doing the same? GH: Yeah, he’s doing the same. AJ: How about, uhm, how about your relationships with your sisters? GH: Pretty good. I mean when we were growing up, uhm, I think we weren’t, we didn’t have much in 
common. We were pretty different people. So my sisters, uhm, my older sister I have always 
admired. Like she is just like the pretty girl. 
AJ: Okay. GH: Just always was, right? AJ: [Laughs]. Uhuh. 
George Hoagland Interview 
GH: And my little sister is just always the baby, right? She’s just like annoying. Just, and they just sort 
of stayed that way. Uhm, up until, uh, my mom passed, and my mom had been suffering from, I 
think, an undiagnosed mental illness that we now probably would have identified as like a 
bipolar disorder. 
AJ: Mhm. GH: So she, uhm, uh, was in and out of, uh, healthcare and, uhm, she’d been institutionalized a 
couple of times. 
AJ: Oh. GH: And then, yeah, she struggled with depression her whole life, and I think she just didn’t get the 
treatment that she wanted. So sadly she was, uhm, uh, she had a manic episode one day, and 
she was driving her car and she crashed her car. And then she was in the hospital for a couple of 
weeks, and then she died after that. So that was, I mean, it’s morbid and awful. Uhm, and it was 
very traumatizing for me. I was twenty-four but it’s something that brought my sisters and I 
much closer together. AJ: Hm. GH: And so we had to sort of say like, “Hey, the roles that we have played all our lives were like I’m 
the weird one and I get to do whatever they want and there’s this one and this one.” We just 
can’t do that anymore. 
AJ: Right. GH: So we are, we have been… so my mom died well in ’95 so that’s almost, almost thirty years ago 
now. 
AJ: Yeah. GH: Yeah, so like the past three years we have been pretty close I would say. AJ: Uhuh. GH: Yeah. AJ: Wow, yeah. 
GH: And they always, they always knew about me. They were just like, “Oh yeah.” AJ: Mhm. GH: “You’re like that.” AJ: [Laughs]. Yeah so, so there, there was never, uhm, a specific coming out moment for you? George Hoagland Interview GH: Not for me. Uhm, I remember my older sister in particular. She wrote me a letter, and it was 
really, really sweet. So I, I don’t even think that I had talked to her about anything, uhm, but she 
wrote me the nicest letter. And she said, oh, gosh, I want to quote her correctly because she 
said it so great. She said something like, “Even if you had like one eyelash and half a kneecap 
[laughs] you would still, you would still be you and you’re perfect and I love you.” And I was like, 
“Oh, that’s so sweet.” AJ: Oh that’s cool. 
GH: So. AJ: What kinds of, uhm, well, let me ask you this. What terms have you used to describe yourself 
over time? 
GH: Sure. Oh that’s a good, that’s a good question. I think of myself as really effeminate. AJ: Mhm. GH: Uhm, and so the complexities involved in saying that I think are, are worth talking about. AJ: Yeah. Absolutely. GH: So. 
AJ: Cause that means there’s this sense of male identity… GH: Exactly. Exactly. Right. AJ: … with a feminine veneer on top. GH: Exactly. AJ: But you talk about it. 
GH: Yeah, yeah. So I’m so happy to talk to you about this. AJ: [Laughs]. GH: Okay, so, so in, in my family, uhm, so I, I spent my teenage years in a household of women. AJ: Uhuh. GH: So here are the, there’s my grandmother who moved in with us… 
AJ: Mhm. 
George Hoagland Interview 
GH: … uhm, my mom, my two sisters, and we lived in a two-bedroom apartment. AJ: Oh wow. GH: Right so it’s the five of us and one bathroom right. Two-bedroom. AJ: Lots of estrogen. GH: Right? So there’s a lot of lady stuff happening. 
AJ: Uhuh. GH: And each of the people in the house, each of the women in the house were very different 
people right with, with just, uhm, I think of everyone just having like amazing qualities. And I 
always admired, like admire is too soft of a word but I always like maybe envy is actually the 
word I’m looking for. AJ: Uhuh. GH: For the kind of feminine strength that they each expressed in their own ways. My little sister is 
somewhat. She’s the baby. AJ: Uhuh. GH: But the other ones like everybody had their own strengths. Like my grandma was just tough as 
hell right. She smoked Marlboro Reds every day. AJ: Wow. GH: [Laughs]. Right. And her favorite album, like, when she moved, her favorite album of all time 
was Purple Rain. AJ: Really? GH: I was like, yeah. She would be smoking Marlboro Reds and she was like maybe, you know, four 
foot eight. Right? AJ: Uhuh. GH: This tiny little person and she had her headphones on, and she’d be singing Purple Rain. It was 
like my favorite thing. She was just like, like did not give a F. Like she just… AJ: Would she like air guitar the, the guitar solo? GH: No, no, no. She was just, she was just tiny and, you know, she wasn’t like super expressive, you 
know? She’s just a tiny person and she was just, yeah, just delightful, just delightful, right? 
George Hoagland Interview 
AJ: That’s a good album. GH: Right? It’s not the best but it’s good, right… AJ: Yeah. GH: … as far as Prince albums go. Uhm, so that’s my grandma. And my mom, uhm, uh, when I was 
little I just thought she was an angel, right? She was , you know, very elegant. At least, you 
know, her outward appearance was always on point right? Uhm, I think she learned a lot from 
growing up in the fifties about how to be a respectable black woman, and she modeled that for 
all, everybody in the neighborhood right. Uhm, and, you know, she was just so, just so put 
together. Very into fashion, very into interior decorating. And I was just like, “Oh, I want to do 
that too.” So she was that, in addition to being, you know, depressed her whole life, uhm, and 
we saw that but we didn’t know what it was. 
AJ: Mhm. GH: Uhm, and, uh, she always was working on the next thing, but she never finished things so she 
was like, “I’m going to business school. I’m going to divinity school. I’m a psychology major. I’m 
like the leader of the choir at church. Like I’m the one that people come to with their problems. 
She was always doing that. So very, she had great leadership qualities and was like always put 
together like very, I don’t know, Hilary Clinton-esque. AJ: [Laughs]. Okay. 
GH: You know, something like that, right? And then my big sister was a bad girl. Like real bad. Like 
she would climb out the window. AJ: Oh wow. 
GH: She would like, she ran away a couple of times. Like she got into fights with people. She wore 
the earrings. Like she had it all. AJ: [Laughs]. Okay. 
GH: She had long hair. AJ: Yeah. GH: She had everything. And long nails. And they’re painted. And she had the cute outfits. So, yeah, 
she was just cool. AJ: Yeah. GH: Uhm, so they all had these, these great qualities that I associated with feminine strength, right? 
And not identifying in the same way that they did, right, like not being a girl or a woman like 
how they were. George Hoagland Interview AJ: Right. GH: I just admired but I didn’t feel like I embodied any of it. 
AJ: Sure. GH: But I learned from it right? AJ: Uhuh. GH: So I think, uhm, the parts of me that I identify as masculine are the parts that are the effeminate 
parts right? AJ: Huh. GH: So when I think of femininity I think of like that’s the tough part. That’s the, right? So I was 
always the kid that was like I had a doll [laughs]… AJ: [Laughs]. GH: I had a doll named Jason which was a little Raggedy Anne Doll. AJ: Okay. 
GH: And the doll’s name was Jason which I had my entire life that I carried around with me until way 
too late. And everybody like my family, they were so nice to me. There was like Jason had a spot 
at the dinner table. AJ: Oh wow. GH: Jason got to do, Jason got to do [laughs] stuff that I didn’t get to do. So, uhm, it, it, the parts of 
me that I did not identify as feminine were the parts that like were very sensitive right and, and 
vulnerable. So that’s where I think my masculinity lies because I had such strong feminine role 
models. AJ: Mhm. GH: So when people ask me like, you know, “Oh, you don’t identify as feminine. Or at least you don’t 
outwardly, like that’s not part of your everyday appearance.” AJ: Sure. GH: I say like, “Well, let me tell you what feminine means to me…” 
AJ: Okay. 
George Hoagland Interview 
GH: “… because it’s like, that would be like hashtag goals, right?” AJ: Right. [Laughs]. GH: I don’t have any illusions that I’m ever going to be like, embody the feminine strength of people 
in my family, but being effeminate is okay. I don’t mind. AJ: Yeah, absolutely. GH: I’m sensitive. AJ: Are you a feminist? GH: Absolutely. Yeah. Before I even knew what it was, I mean… 
AJ: Uhuh. GH: Yeah. AJ: What’s your ideas or thoughts around the term and how it manifests itself in black culture? GH: In black culture in particular I kind of feel like the term is unnecessary, uhm, because people are 
out there like living every day, and pop culture, however, is very necessary so when I think 
about, uhm, young people in particular, particularly like, not just young black woman, but young 
women of color, uhm, who come through my classes and, you know, I tell them it doesn’t, you 
know, doesn’t matter to me whether or not you identify as feminist but let’s talk about the 
people in your house in your neighborhood where you’re from and the things that they do that 
you look at and go, “Oh, damn. I could learn something from that,” right? And that’s, uh, where 
people’s beliefs or how those experiences and knowing those people informs their beliefs I think 
is inherently feminist. AJ: Mhm. GH: But, uhm, I don’t, I mean, it’s, it’s currently I think useful for black people to attach to the word 
because it’s like common to pop culture parlance so it’s like a handy shorthand. AJ: Sure. GH: But I also feel like black women in particular have always been feminists. 
AJ: Yeah. GH: Do we have a choice? AJ: There was no… GH: And I include myself in that because I want to be tough that way. George Hoagland Interview AJ: Right. Yeah. I mean we worked since we landed on these shores outside of the household… GH: Absolutely. 
AJ: … as well as inside the household. And, uh, yeah. GH: Mhm. AJ: Provided and raised families and… GH: Absolutely. AJ: … stood up for the neighborhood. 
GH: Absolutely. Right. It’s called running shit… AJ: Right. GH: … which is like yeah, it’s always been the case. AJ: Exactly. GH: Yeah, yeah. 
AJ: No, no doubt. Thank you for sharing about that. Uhm, so effeminate, that’s the main term that 
you… Did you identify as a lesbian or do you identify as a lesbian? GH: I never liked it. I mean if it meant that I could go to a club or meet a person, generally a girl, if it 
worked then I’d be like, “Yeah, sure.” [Laughs]. You know. Whatever. AJ: [Laughs]. Okay. GH: Uhm, but even then like when I had conversation, conversations with my friends we always 
talked about like [breathes out] lesbians. It’s so hard right cause like in the nineties, uhm, this 
would be like in the early nineties when I was like old enough to go to clubs and stuff, you only 
got two flavors of lesbians. They were butch or femme. That was it right? AJ: Uhuh. 
GH: And it was like one wore lipstick and the other one had a fannypack. AJ: [Laughs]. GH: And I was just like those options aren’t working for me right? AJ: [Laughs]. Exactly. George Hoagland Interview GH: Yeah. And then there were like the cool people who were like Lesbian Avengers, and I wanted to 
roll with them but not like, not in a identificatory way but because they were revolutionaries 
right? 
AJ: Right. Right, yeah. GH: And I’m just like I wanna be where the revolutionaries are. AJ: Sure. GH: Although I’m limp wristed. [Laughs]. If I had a chance to take on a sexual identity like limp 
wristed pretty much sums it up. AJ: Okay. Limp wristed. That’s a new identity that I, uh, I mean, I know it has been hoisted upon 
many, many people but… GH: Mhm. Yeah, I feel like it only works when the package that you expect it to be in is different. AJ: Right. GH: Right, so if I were, for example, like a white guy. I would not describe myself as a white guy. AJ: Right. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Got it. Uhm, to the extent that you feel comfortable, George, uhm, and 
if there hasn’t been any that’s certainly your choice, uhm, but have you undergone any medical 
interventions as a part of, uh, expressing your androgyny? GH: Mhm. Yeah, so I’ll, I’ll be weird about it cause I, that’s where I come from. So I have, but not 
necessarily. Well, okay, one was, was cosmetics. So I had a breast reduction. 
AJ: Okay. GH: Uhm, and here at the U. AJ: Mhm. GH: Thanks U for paying for most of that. AJ: [Laughs]. 
GH: Uhm, in 2007. Uhm, but I also at the same time, I also when I moved to Minnesota I either 
realized or, uhm, started to have this, uhm, hormonal condition that I was being treated for for 
like the entire time I was in grad school. So from like 2002 to like 2011. So I had, uhm, an adrenal 
condition called… oh, it’s, it’s a, ah, it’s a good one. Gosh. So anyway it’s when, uhm, it’s when 
your adrenal glands produce too much… what is it called… ah, I can’t believe it. I can’t forget it. 
Anyway, so as a result of a begin… 
George Hoagland Interview 
AJ: Epinephrine. Testosterone. GH: It’s, it’s a, so it’s an endocrine issue right... AJ: Uhuh. GH: … which is wrapped up in like other kinds of treatments. So it’s an endocrine issue, uhm, and it’s 
not cortisol. It is the hormone that regulates your potassium. AJ: Hm. GH: And your potassium is what you need for your heart to beat right. AJ: Right. 
GH: So I had a, uhm, oh my gosh, I can see the word in my mind and I’m blanking on it but I had a, 
uhm, not a cancerous tumor but an adrenal tumor that was causing me to produce too much of 
this hormone… AJ: Mhm. GH: … uhm, that, uh, affected my levels of potassium. AJ: Adrenaline? 
GH: Uhm, well your adrenal glands, there, there’s a relationship right… AJ: Yes. GH: … between, they, they produce a lot of hormones and adrenaline is one of them. AJ: Yes. Is one of them. Yeah. GH: So, uh, uh, also so I had a breast reduction but I also, uhm, was treated for this condition which 
doesn’t have anything outright to do with the sex hormones that we think about as regulating, 
uhm, our biological situations whatever they are. AJ: Mhm. GH: Uhm, but this one is, uhm, this particular condition, uhm, affects hormone balances that can, I 
think, indirectly affect how you express or how your biology works sort of in a male or female 
sense right? And I do not pretend to have any sort of intersex condition or anything like that 
right? AJ: Sure. 
George Hoagland Interview 
GH: Uhm, but I was treated for this condition and it, uhm, required me to visit an endocrinologist for 
like most of the time I was in grad school. AJ: Mhm. 
GH: Uhm, an endocrinologist when they see someone like me whose name is George… AJ: Right. GH: … they start to, well some of them do and some of them did at the U, would be suspicious about 
what I was doing to myself… AJ: Got it. GH: … to like make this thing so would be in a doctor’s office and one time I actually had a doctor 
outright accuse me of, uhm, illegally taking testosterone or acquiring it and taking unregulated 
amounts of testosterone. AJ: Wow. 
GH: And I was just like, “Okay, tell me more about like what, how that’s working and I filed a 
complaint.” AJ: Uhuh. 
GH: Uhm, so that’s wasn’t, uh, a surgery but that was like a, a condition that had other effects that 
were… AJ: Mhm. 
GH: … medical, medicalized, right? AJ: And so you’re taking male hormones or? GH: No, I wasn’t taking any hormones. It’s just my bodily situation, just how it came. So, uhm, I had 
the most, I think, no, I had one adrenal gland removed… AJ: Mhm. GH: … in 2011 which solved my problems which was mainly, uhm, high blood pressure and low 
potassium. Uhm, so, uh, there are no problems with that now but what that whole experience 
taught me was that, uhm, medical treatment is such a big factor in understanding how other 
people’s perceptions of your biology work. AJ: Hm. 
George Hoagland Interview 
GH: Right? Uhm, and one of the big things that it did was it really like made me understand like my 
body is fine. Right? There isn’t, while I may want a more idealized gender identity and some 
days I do… AJ: Sure. GH: … uhm, uh, I have no desire to interact with the medical establishment… AJ: Wow. 
GH: … to, to get there, right? Uhm, because who the heck knows what’s going on in there right? 
Everything is working. I’m healthy now. AJ: Yeah. [Laughs]. 
GH: I’m good. AJ: I’m good. GH: Right? AJ: Right. GH: So that was a really long way of saying it. 
AJ: No, actually… GH: But I think about these things really deeply. AJ: Uhuh. GH: Right? About like what it means to… AJ: So no future medical stuff? 
GH: I mean I’m really happy to be healthy and not to have to go anywhere… AJ: Right. GH: … or take any medicine. AJ: Yeah. GH: Uhm, but, you know, maybe when I retire I will just get a whole overhaul. Get things lifted up. 
[Laughs]. AJ: Wow. George Hoagland Interview GH: I don’t know. AJ: How did you come to the name George? 
GH: I did not. Uhm, so my parents named be something else, my dead name. AJ: Uhuh, yeah, your dead name. GH: My dead name, right. And my, uh, the name never fit, never for anybody. AJ: Yeah. GH: Right? Uhm, I think, you know, my parents were a little suspicious but… 
AJ: Really? Okay. GH: Yeah, yeah. So, uh, I was in college and I worked at a wonderful, uhm, independent bookstore. 
And I just visited it this summer. 
AJ: Mhm. GH: And I was talking with my, my co-workers, uhm, at the bookstore about how I, you know, always 
hated my name. I told the story of how I got my name. So my dad named me after an ex 
girlfriend. AJ: Uhuh. GH: Bad idea. 
AJ: Really? GH: Yeah! I know, right? And I don’t know if my mom ever knew that or not. AJ: Okay. [Laughs]. GH: It’s a bad idea. So, uhm, so the people at the bookstore we started like brainstorming what 
names would be good, and I said, “Well, like, I always liked George,” uhm, cause I like George 
Elliot. 
AJ: Uhuh. GH: And also George Sand, and they are like two like... they both had these like sort of incognito 
existences as like literary figures that I thought was really cool. 
AJ: Mhm. 
George Hoagland Interview 
GH: So they just sort of made a list of the names and then people just voted and George won. So. AJ: [Laughs]. Really? GH: So I was like there it is. I am henceforth, I am George. And it just, it, it seems, it wasn’t even that 
big of a deal. AJ: Yeah. GH: They were like, “Oh, yeah. Of course that’s your name.” AJ: Wow. GH: So, yeah. Yeah. 
AJ: How long ago was this? [Laughs]. GH: Gosh, when did that happen? Uhm, ninety… ninety-eight maybe? AJ: Mhm. GH: Ninety-seven, ninety-eight. AJ: Did you take legal steps…? 
GH: I didn’t take legal steps until it really mattered. AJ: Okay. GH: And it didn’t really matter until I went to graduate school. AJ: Until graduate school. GH: So I changed my name legally here in Minnesota for the outrageous fee of like $300 dollars. 
AJ: Mhm. GH: Uhm, and because it was so expensive cause I was a graduate student, who has $300 dollars, 
right? 
AJ: Yeah. GH: Uhm, so, uh, because it was so expensive I decided I needed a middle name, right, so I changed 
my middle name too which also was given to me… 
AJ: [Laughs]. 
George Hoagland Interview 
GH: … by my best friend and a friend of hers who’s a professor in Toronto. And I said, “You know, I 
need a middle name but I just want like an everyday name. And my nickname before then had 
been George every day.” AJ: Uhuh. GH: Cause I’m just George. I’m George every day. AJ: Uhuh. 
GH: And so the friend, uhm, whose name is Steve Flusty who is a geographer in Toronto. He said like, 
“Oh…” AJ: Steve… 
GH: Flusty. AJ: Flusty. F.L.U… GH: F.L.U.S.T.Y. AJ: Flusty. GH: He is a geographer at the University of Toronto I believe. And he said like, “Oh, so you need 
quotidian name. Also don’t you wanna be like GQ?” And I was like, “Yeah, I wanna be GQ,” 
right? AJ: Uhuh. GH: So my middle name is Quotidian which means every day. So… AJ: Wow. GH: So for $300 dollars I got the longest name I could get. [Laughs]. 
AJ: That is a great story. GH: Isn’t it? I was like yeah, it is good. AJ: Fascinating. Wow. GQ. GH: GQ. Yeah. AJ: I’m gonna start calling you as such. 
GH: Some, some people do, and I’m not mad about it. 
George Hoagland Interview 
AJ: Okay. Alright. Very good. Has, has your sort of outward gender expression, because, you know, 
people sort of treat us, and when I say us I mean everyone on the planet based on their 
perception of they think we are versus how we identify ourselves most of the time. GH: Mhm. AJ: I mean we have to kind of have our people on the head. Some of us who don’t, uh, identify as I 
mean you aren’t necessarily perceived, uhm… GH: Right, right. AJ: … uhm, but, you know, I would suspect many people, particularly based on your name perceive 
you as male. GH: I think I couldn’t say. AJ: How it is that they think their right? GH: Yeah, that’s a good question. Uhm, I think, it’s one of those instances where school has been 
such, like the only place that I can be. I can’t imagine what my life would be like say in corporate 
America where there would be certain expectations of like comportment that I would have to 
live up to right? AJ: Yeah, golfing. 
GH: Exactly, right. AJ: [Laughs]. GH: You know, do you show up to the meeting in a tie or, you know, a pants suit or what do you do… AJ: Right. GH: … so luckily I don’t have to deal with any of that. And I have the great benefit, uhm, as an adult 
and as a professional to introduce myself to people in the way that makes sense. AJ: You wanna be. GH: Right. 
AJ: For sure. GH: And then, you know, if things get really weird and people aren’t sure what to say, I may be like, 
“Oh, what’s my prefix? It’s doctor.” You can just call me doctor. 
AJ: Okay. 
George Hoagland Interview 
GH: Right. AJ: Mhm. Yeah. Exactly. GH: Uhm, so I think that’s probably the number one influence that, you know, it gives me a lot of 
confidence actually to walk around day to day. It doesn’t matter to me what you see. AJ: Mhm. GH: That said, uhm, uh, I have I think throughout my life been pretty accepting of like whatever 
people’s perception of me is. AJ: Mhm. GH: So I get ladied all the time, right? AJ: Okay. GH: I also get sir’ed depending on where I go. 
AJ: Mhm. GH: So, for example, I was in Australia and everybody sir’ed me. And I was like what is that, right? 
Like because I am really short so like it doesn’t, you know, you could put a lot of things together 
and I was like I got a big butt, you know. AJ: [Laughs]. GH: You’re like, “Oh that’s not a sir,” right? But they were just like across the board everybody, and I 
was just like, “Huh, what is that?” And I came to this, uhm, unsupported, uh, conclusion that, 
uhm, Australians aren’t used to seeing black women traveling alone which I was so I must be a 
man, right? AJ: Got it. 
GH: So I thought that, I don’t know, it, I don’t know if that’s true or not. AJ: There’s probably some reality to that. GH: Somewhat right? AJ: It may not be the whole thing. GH: Yeah, yeah. Uhm, so, yeah, it, it’s, you know, I, I— 
AJ: I mean your haircut is sort of Afro punk masculine-ish. 
George Hoagland Interview 
GH: Right, right. Yeah. So I shaved my head for the first time in ’92. AJ: Oh, you did a baldie or just a straight fade? GH: Oh, yeah. All the way. Just, just, no, bald. Yeah, so that was like every week. Just cut it all off. 
Yeah. And that was after years of having the creep. So I had like a little patch of hair right here. 
[Laughs]. AJ: [Laughs]. 
GH: So, yeah, my sister would just shave my head for me. AJ: Uhuh. GH: Like every week and that was… AJ: Wow. GH: … yeah. So I was just a little punk kid in the mosh pit. 
AJ: Mhm. GH: And all that. Uhm, so I think those kind of experiences had, I don’t know… part of me feels very 
fortunate that I don’t consider it such a big deal but another part of me is like it gives me the 
ability to advocate for any particular group that I could… AJ: Sure. GH: … represent at any given time, right? So, for example, when people from the women’s march 
send me an email saying like women like me and you. AJ: Right. GH: I have no problem responding to that saying like, “Yes!” Because ideologically we are in the 
same place, right? Uhm, if someone refuses to address me by my, you know, honorific or 
something like that because they insist on saying Mrs. or something like that or Miss. It doesn’t 
happen very often but when it does that’s when I have to be like, “No.” Right? AJ: Mhm. 
GH: Uhm, yeah, but otherwise socially like the things that we get to walk around or at least the 
things that I get to walk around with in Minneapolis like people see a lot of other stuff I think. 
[Laughs]. AJ: Yeah. GH: They worry about like what’s your gender? So. George Hoagland Interview AJ: No negative police interactions or white women that are not in the academy kinda get weird 
when you’re approaching them in the elevator or walking down the street. Like I know a lot of 
black men… okay, actually having lived thirty years of my life as a black male I have experienced 
these things too. GH: Mhm. AJ: Uh, but have you, uhm, had any experiences like that? 
GH: Yeah. With police, with NPB in particular, uhm, been stopped twice for… it started off for being, I 
think, black while walking. AJ: Mhm. 
GH: Uhm, and I think, well the first time… No I wasn’t walking. The first time I got stopped, and this 
was like not too long after I moved here. So I was riding my bike down Nicolet Mall back when 
you weren’t supposed to ride your bike but it was farmer’s market day, and so you can, there’s 
no choice so you’re sort of like weaving in and out… 
AJ: Right. GH: … between buses. And I got stuck, and it’s not laugh worthy particularly in our current climate. It 
was infuriating. So I got stopped by, uh, uh, an officer in a squad car who sees me from behind, 
and I had dreadlocks then. AJ: Hm. GH: So little bit longer hair then. Uhm, and the officer yells, “Hey!” Right? And then yells, “Hey!” 
louder, and then like pulls off on me with the lights, right? AJ: Mhm. GH: And is on the bullhorn. And I’m just like, “What the!?” Right? So I turn around, and this is before 
my breast reduction even though still I got the chest-eses. So I turn around, and he sees me 
from the front and he was just like, “Oh, never mind, baby.” Right? And I just go, [gasps]. That’s 
the grossest thing that has ever happened. AJ: Oh my god. 
GH: Yeah. So then I’m stopped by the police again, uhm, years later. And, uhm, I don’t remember 
what I looked like at the time but the police, the officer in that case, and I swear to god, it could 
have been the same officer. They looked identical. AJ: Yeah. GH: Shaved head. You know? The MPD. George Hoagland Interview AJ: Yes. GH: The ones that, the ones that when you see them across the street you’re like, “Oh god. I just 
want to, I just want, can they just go away?” AJ: Mhm. GH: So, uhm, uh, stopped by an officer again, uhm, and this guy was just so angry. Like, I’m just like, 
“Yeah, this could go really really bad.” Like I don’t know if it’s a gender thing or the cop just 
looked crazy to me. AJ: Right. GH: Just looked insane, right? So those are two instances of being stopped in Minneapolis. Never 
been stopped by police any place else. AJ: Huh. GH: I don’t know what that means. AJ: Right. GH: Actually I think I do. Uhm, and then the other example… you said police and… 
AJ: And professional life, uhm… GH: Professional life. AJ: Medical. You’ve already talked about the medical… GH: Right, right, right. AJ: … world but, uhm, I guess here’s the, uh, five hundred thousand dollar question. [Laughs]. 
GH: [Laughs]. AJ: Which restroom do you use? GH: I use all of them, which again is like it doesn’t, you know, it’s not a big deal. I used to be, actually 
I, I… AJ: The one with the shortest line. [Laughs]. GH: And usually, you know, it’s Minnesota. There aren’t lines for the bathrooms here for the most 
part. Uhm, but I also should contextualize that I’m usually on a campus when I’m using, uh, 
public restroom or in a restaurant in which case like restaurants really care. George Hoagland Interview AJ: Right. GH: They don’t care. Uhm, but I used to be very, uhm, uh, I think overly concerned about, uhm, what 
white male students would think about seeing me in the men’s room. And this was before the 
gender neutral bathroom… AJ: Mhm. GH: … uhm, uh, sort of wave took over in Minnesota, right? AJ: Sure. GH: So I would, you know, for example, like during a break in class like if we were taking a bathroom 
break like I would make an effort to go to the women’s room to like not alienate students. And 
this was like my own head trip because I have no idea what they would have thought. AJ: Right. GH: Probably not much, right? Uhm, I’m a big fan of, uh, movements to put a label of what facilities 
are available on the door. To say urinals and stalls or, you know, toilets, or whatever. AJ: Mhm. Right. GH: I think it’s, it’s handy to me but, uh, I’ll use, I’d prefer it to be clean. AJ: Yeah. [Laughs]. GH: But I’m not against using a urinal but, you know, it’s usually not my first choice. 
AJ: Right. Yeah. Huh, wow. Talk to me a little bit about, uhm, love and relationships. How is it dating 
or relating as an androgynous queer black person? GH: [Laughs]. Uh, good mostly. [Laughs]. 
AJ: [Laughs]. GH: I have been, I have been very fortunate. AJ: Yeah, balloons and flowers being thrown up in the air. [Laughs]. GH: I have been, I mean, I have to tell you, Andrea, I feel very blessed. All the struggles that I have, 
the dark times, the hard times, like I have never, never sensed, uh, being unwanted or being, uh, 
you know, just out there on my own. Well, I have often felt lonely for all kinds of reasons. Uhm, 
but in terms of dating, I was really luck. I think I started dating at like… maybe twelve. AJ: Wow. George Hoagland Interview GH: Something like that. Yeah. Uh, all the cute people. Uhm, when I was little, like under eighteen it 
was all boy identified people. AJ: Mhm. GH: And then, I don’t know, college time then I started dating girl identified people. Uhm, but then 
when I was an adult I realized that one of, at least one of the people who I dated, uh, when I was 
younger like that person’s gender identity, you know, was, was in flux as, as… 
AJ: Okay. GH: … or at least they’re expression of their identity was in flux. AJ: Mhm. Mhm. GH: Uhm, as mine would later become. Or at least the expression of it more openly would become. 
Uhm, we’re talking about it more openly I guess. And, yeah, I’ve had lovely relationships. I’m 
married. 
AJ: You’re married? Congratulations. GH: Uhm, I am married. Thank you. AJ: How long have you been married? GH: Oh gosh. She’s gonna watch this. [Laughs]. AJ: [Laughs]. 
GH: You better get ready. Uhm, we are coming up on our three year wedding anniversary. AJ: Wow. GH: And we have been together for six years. AJ: Got it. GH: Yeah, so I’m married to a person who identifies as, uh, cisgender. 
AJ: Mhm. GH: Uhm, as a cisgender woman. Uhm, although I call her, she’s pretty butch. AJ: Mhm. [Laughs]. GH: I mean, I think she is. George Hoagland Interview AJ: Okay. GH: And… 
AJ: I’m just gonna say every time I’ve seen her she’s in a dress but I just… GH: Which is, which is great right because she is so… AJ: Which means nothing right? It means nothing. GH: Exactly. AJ: It’s like the perception thing that I talked about earlier. 
GH: Mhm. Yeah, it’s a like it’s interesting. And we in a lot of ways, I think, because our, our culture 
here in Minneapolis is, you know, it’s labeled progressive or at least it’s… it looks progressive, 
right, from a lot of different angles. Uhm, but white people here and my partner is white, can 
play with a bunch of different things in terms of gender expression. 
AJ: Sure. GH: And we see those kids walking around town all the time, right? AJ: Mhm. GH: So, uh, my partner, uh, she is a tough woman from South Dakota, and when she puts a dress on 
she’s fabulously gorgeous and she’s still super butch. [Laughs]. AJ: [Laughs]. Okay. How, how, how do you meet people? How do you navigate that conversation 
when you’re, you know, I know you’re married now. GH: Mhm. AJ: You’ve been in a relationship for six years but prior to that, I mean, or even this relationship… GH: Yeah. I would say learning all of the time right? AJ: Mhm. 
GH: I mean, I’m learning from talking to you about these things… AJ: Sure. GH: … right now. AJ: Uhuh. George Hoagland Interview GH: Uhm, I don’t think. I think I have been sort of insulated from my own, from talking about my 
own development because it has felt so natural for a lot of my life. So it wasn’t really until, you 
know, I was in my career, you know, as an academic that people started to, uh, ask me out right 
questions about like, you know, so what, what is important to you in this regard, or what 
pronouns do you use or whatever? And that’s when I really had to start to think about things to 
say. Oh, so now I have to make a choice about these things whereas before like all was good, 
right? AJ: You’re just George Quotidian. GH: Exactly. AJ: [Laughs]. 
GH: Right? So now I have to make a choice and for me that choice is always, like I said, it’s political. 
Right? AJ: Mhm. 
GH: So when I publish, because occasionally I have to do that in my job, right, I have to chose like 
submit, when you submit your bio cause you always have to submit your bio right? It’s like 
which pronouns am I gonna use, and I decided that I would use, uh, for publications that were 
strictly like, you know, uhm, he or she, then I would use she because it was the one that was 
most different from my name. AJ: Mhm. GH: So to show that there was some kind of contrast. Uhm, and these things are, they’re always a 
choice, right. I mean for me. They’re, they’re always a choice. AJ: Sure. GH: And it’s always a political one, uhm, for the, the people who I surround myself with I live very 
much in a bubble except when I’m being stopped by MPD or whatever. AJ: [Laughs]. GH: Right? 
AJ: Uh, queer bubble I would imagine. GH: A very, it’s a very queer bubble, right? Uhm, even like going to TSA, right? AJ: Uhuh. 
George Hoagland Interview 
GH: Like I academically talked about what it means to go through TSA as a gender non-conforming 
person. AJ: Mhm. 
GH: The tips and tricks to get through, you know, as quickly as possible. One is to get, uh, a precheck. AJ: Yes. GH: So. Mhm. AJ: We love precheck. GH: Exactly. It doesn’t always work but it still cuts down on the amount of time you have to spend 
like say like, “Did you push the right button? I know you only two.” AJ: Uhuh. GH: If you do that, can you get out of my crotch? 
AJ: Right. Exactly. GH: Yeah, so, uhm… AJ: You have an anomaly in your thighs. GH: Exactly. Yeah. AJ: [Laughs]. 
GH: [Laughs]. I’ve been told so many things so that the academics who, who work on that in gender 
studies, they call it hot crotch. AJ: Hot crotch. I’ve never heard of that term. 
GH: Yeah, so when your crotch lights up… AJ: Oh, wow. Okay. [Laughs]. GH: Yeah. Yeah, it’s a thing. AJ: That’s a thing. [Laughs]. GH: [Laughs]. 
AJ: Oh, uhm… who’s the first gender non-conforming or transgender person you’ve ever met? 
George Hoagland Interview 
GH: Ever met? Okay, I was gonna say. AJ: And how did that impact you? GH: Another gender non-conforming person… See, I went back immediately to something more 
recent because, you know, in the ‘70s we didn’t use those words, right? AJ: Right. Exactly. GH: So I can think about people that I saw and was just like, “Oh, noted.” I have to keep that person 
in mind. AJ: Mhm. GH: So I, obviously, I never met Silvester but like that’s like the person that first comes to mind. 
Seeing Silvester on TV and going like, “Something is happening there.” I like it. AJ: Yes. GH: Right? AJ: I’ve actually seen Silvester three times. GH: Oh! Lucky! 
AJ: [Laughs]. GH: So, uhm, but I think in college, uhm, there were people who, at that time, we used to, you know, 
use the, the terms, uhm, MTF or FTM, right? 
AJ: Mhm. GH: Uhm, and that was pretty much the only terms I had ever heard. And I met someone who at that 
time identified as FTM, and that person seemed so unhappy and so, I mean, the discrimination 
that he must have gone through… AJ: Mhm. GH: … just must have been so immense that he was even uncomfortable what were then, uhm, 
lesbian and gay spaces. AJ: Mhm. GH: Right? Cause, I mean, bisexual spaces didn’t really exist then either. 
AJ: Sure. 
George Hoagland Interview 
GH: Right? Uhm, and I remember thinking how when I met this person, who’s name I’ve since 
forgotten, uhm, thinking like, “White people,” you know, like, “Wow, I’m really glad that you’ve 
done this… AJ: Mhm. GH: … but why, why are you here? This place is so awful for you. AJ: Right. 
GH: It’s so awful. You know? Uhm, then later on when I, when the language around, particularly, uh, 
transgender people started to evolve right… AJ: Mhm. 
GH: … I started thinking like, “Oh, okay.” And then the internet came around and then there were 
communities where, I mean, I didn’t participate in the communities but I saw people 
participating in communities and then technology and devices came around, uhm, and then 
here at the U people were talking about medical procedures and then the history of the 
university and the… I met a doctor who had been retired and who had started doing what we 
then called, uhm, sex reassignment surgeries, like in the ‘80s, and I was just like, “What was 
that?” And he was like, “Oh yeah, people came here, and they stayed.” And when I asked other 
people about it they would say like, “Yeah, that’s why Minneapolis is queer more so than gay 
cause all the other cities were more gay.” 
AJ: Mhm. GH: In 2017 I don’t think it’s the same but yeah, so the most… the people who have the most, the 
greatest affect on me were celebrities I would say. So Silvester and then of course Prince would 
be like my big numbers. AJ: So you put Prince in a gender non-conforming… GH: Oh, absolutely. Everybody in my neighborhood wanted to be Prince. 
AJ: Uhuh. GH: Didn’t matter what their gender identity was. AJ: Really? GH: And we all felt like yeah, I am Prince. AJ: And I am Prince. 
GH: So I was just like, “Yeah, I’m Prince. Of course I am.” Right? 
George Hoagland Interview 
AJ: [Singing Prince lyrics] “I'm not a woman, I'm not a man.” GH: [Laughs]. AJ: “I am something that you'll never understand.” [Laughs]. GH: Exactly. Exactly. And so that went all the way back to, you know, for you, right, to ’78. AJ: Right. 
GH: So, you know, I always thought that. Yeah. Then there was Boy George who everybody said they 
would date. Everybody. They were just like, “Boy George is so pretty. I would totally date him.” AJ: Yeah. Wow. 
GH: I think that’s probably still true. AJ: You’re taking me down, uhm, musical lane here, George. GH: Yeah. AJ: [Laughs]. Uhm, what do you think the relationship is between the L, the G, the B, and the broad 
umbrella T? And I wanna really… because you think about this a lot T is out where, uhm, 
genderqueer, gender non-conforming identities fit within that context. 
GH: Sure. AJ: If you can. GH: Yeah, yeah. Uhm, I’ll try. AJ: Mhm. GH: So I think there is a relationship between all the letters is fraught, right? 
AJ: Mhm. GH: Uhm, I think the idea of solidarity is pretty much what continues to bind people together even if, 
uhm, identities and ways of being and ways of living don’t really match up, right? So, uhm, I 
think like just in the context of, well, let’s just say the Twin Cities cause that’s where we are, 
right? AJ: Mhm. GH: To be gay in the Twin Cities is very different than being queer, to being, uh, bi is something 
totally else. We’re talking about different populations of people altogether, right… 
George Hoagland Interview 
AJ: Sure. GH: … who may not like come together for any reason at any time and if you throw in thing like, you 
know, class and race and gender and ability and all of these other, uh, uh, ways of being in, in 
identity states, we can see that the tensions, uhm, between, let’s say the L and the T, right, or 
maybe not the L and the T. Maybe the G and the T, right… AJ: Mhm. GH: … are, uhm, uh, deeply rooted, right? Uhm, what that means for gender non-conforming people, 
I think, is something that, that I, I experience, uhm, professionally but not as much socially. 
Yeah, I don’t think so. Uhm, there’s that, there’s a, uhm, a kind of hypervisibility mixed with an 
invisibility right? AJ: Mh. GH: Now progressive circles, genderqueer people kind of rule the day, right, because I, I think of 
genderqueer people as being kind of like shapeshifters, like political shapeshifters. AJ: Sure. GH: Right? Uhm, but in terms of like, you know, when you’re talking to a community about like why 
you should be supportive of this particular group of people, the genderqueer person might be 
the first person to alienate that group to be like, that group might say, whoever the group is, 
that church group or whatever might say like, “You don’t quite fit into that category, you person 
who could pass as male or female whenever you want to.” AJ: Right. GH: Right? AJ: Mhm. GH: Uhm, and so for me when I think about being both hyper visible and invisible and then I add 
class and ability and race to these things, right… AJ: Mhm. GH: … uhm, I feel like there’s both a represent like hot spot for the need to represent. At the same 
time like a huge aversion to wanting to like be in that light. Do you know what I mean? Cause it’s 
like I’m not clear at all actually I don’t think. AJ: Sure. GH: But there’s… it’s fraught, right? So there’s, there are these tensions between, uhm, being 
genderqueer and being in, in solidarity with LGBTQAI and there’s two Q’s right for the 
questioning and the queer… George Hoagland Interview AJ: Mhm. GH: … depending on your age group, and that… 
AJ: Yep. GH: Uhm, and I think in our current moment we have just used queer as a kind of like overarching 
label. So if you say like you’re queer you can pretty much have any gender identity you want, 
right? I think that’s great. Uhm, at the same time, it’s not particularly developmental, right? 
Because queer is not going anywhere, right? There’s not like queer plus. [Laughs]. AJ: Right. [Laughs]. GH: Right. Yeah. AJ: Can, can, can straight identified people be queer? GH: Uhm, I think… let me put it this way. I think one’s sexuality and one’s way of being are not 
necessarily linked in overt like well they’re just not necessarily in overt direct ways. AJ: Mhm. GH: Right? So someone could be straight, let’s say and have, you know, sexual practices that many 
people would not recognize as heterosexual right? That person to me seems pretty queer right? 
Uhm, there could be a person who identifies as queer who has sexual practices that many 
people would identify as heterosexual right depending on where there gender falls and where 
their partner’s gender falls. Uhm, so the sort answer is yes. The long answer is yes and… 
[Laughs]. 
AJ: And I, I’m not, I have no preconceived, I’m just asking a question based on sort of your 
comments. GH: Yeah. 
AJ: Uhm, you made me think about it and I know for a fact that a number of quote “straight” 
identified people do. GH: Mhm. I think about the issues in… 
AJ: Wear the queer label. Yeah. GH: Mhm. I think about the issues, I mean, I work with college students so I’m thinking about, you 
know, people, you know, from eighteen to twenty-five or whatever who, uhm, maybe 
experiencing sexual behavior in an adult way for like the first time right? And I think about the 
experiences of students who either, while they’re in college, or shortly before they come to 
college, uhm, identity as trans. And many students get to college with their, you know, their George Hoagland Interview 
government name and then that government name becomes a dead name while they’re in 
college, right, and then they may or may not have physical changes that go along with that. 
Uhm, and I, when I talk to these students I get the sense that many of them are looking for like 
validation in their current identity, right? And they worry about like are they trans enough right? 
AJ: Right. GH: Are they queer enough? Are they whatever, right? And some of them really feel comforted by 
the notion that, you know, I say to them, like, you might not know that you’re trans until after 
you have sex with someone. AJ: Right. GH: It’s possible. Right? And many it’s likely. I don’t know. Don’t know that many people’s 
experiences. But it’s possible so I, you know, when I say like, your gender identity and your 
sexuality might be combined in these indirect, idiosyncratic personal ways… AJ: Mhm. GH: … that mean, you know, you, it doesn’t, it doesn’t have an effect on how trans you are right? Or 
how queer you are or how straight you are necessarily right? So then when you add all the 
political connotations and then there’s like safety issues and then there’s like, you know, 
community issues and certainly there’s race issues because to be like trans and black and queer 
in Minneapolis is different from being trans and black and queer in New York. 
AJ: Right. GH: Or any other place. Right? AJ: Yeah. GH: You know? So, yeah. I think these questions are like some of them, the most pressing questions 
like in terms of like humanity that we have right now in the United States especially. AJ: Mhm. GH: Right, like… AJ: Around gender identity? 
GH: Around gender iden— AJ: Expression. GH: Around identity and expression and sexuality and understanding how sex works at all right? At 
least having a personal understanding of what it means to be a sexual person. These are huge George Hoagland Interview 
questions for us, right? Cause those things are so bound up in our notions of what’s human and 
what’s not, right? AJ: Last two questions. Where do you see the trans community fifty years from now? And when I 
say trans I’m including gender non-conforming and genderqueer, gender fuckers, nihilists, 
[laughs]. GH: Right. AJ: Uh, cause that’s the only language we have right now. GH: Mhm. AJ: Uhm, when, so where might the community progress to when you just talked about this as 
some of the biggest issues of our time, uhm, fifty years from now? And are there any questions 
that I didn’t ask you that you want to be sure…? GH: Uhm, the second question I just want to ask you questions and talk to you. AJ: [Laughs]. Oh, oh. GH: We don’t need to record that. AJ: Okay. 
GH: Uhm, at least not in this setting. Uhm, fifty years from now, I mean, part of me thinks well we 
could look back to the past fifty years and recall that like well, you know, first of all the 
community will be everywhere as it was fifty years ago and as it is today, right? AJ: Mhm. Sure. GH: It might be more numerous or more visible and the language I’m imagining will change, right? AJ: Mhm. 
GH: Uhm, I would like to see the term transgender in particular used in the same way that the term 
gender is used. AJ: Mm. 
GH: So when someone askes you what’s your gender identity, you would say what, a variety of 
transgender, right? AJ: Right. 
GH: So if someone said, you know, someone asked me like, “What’s your gender George?” I don’t 
say, “Oh, I’m gender.” Right? George Hoagland Interview AJ: Yeah. [Laughs]. GH: [Laughs]. You would say like, and, uh, trends are you know trans will come as a descriptor, you 
know, hopefully in the future gender will come as a descriptor and not like a box that you check. 
Uhm, fifty years from now I have hopes but I don’t know that I have like visions, right? I want, 
uhm, the number one thing, I would say, I want us, and I include myself in the community as you 
did, I want us out of jail. AJ: Right, yes. GH: That’s the first thing I want, right? Fifty years, no trans people in jail. AJ: Mhm. 
GH: Uhm, and I want thriving, being everywhere, being whatever it is that people do, right, running 
the military… AJ: Colleges. 
GH: Yeah, yeah. AJ: Military. GH: Yeah. I mean running it as trans people are doing right now. AJ: City council. [Laughs]. GH: Exactly, exactly. So, I mean, it won’t even be city council. It would just be like who in the 
government is not trans right? Because you would need, you would need people with the 
broadest ranges of experience and perspective and understanding or the complexities of human 
nature to run shit. AJ: Yes. 
GH: Right? So, and that, I mean, is a, it’s a, it’s a big responsibility for the trans community but I feel 
like people are already caring. AJ: Yeah, yeah. So I think that’s true, and I think the experiences of navigating, uhm, multiple 
identities through time and space do. Uhm, provide you a unique perspective… GH: Absolutely. AJ: … on, uhm, many, many ideas that govern our culture and society. 
GH: Absolutely. Yeah. 
George Hoagland Interview 
AJ: Yeah. GH: It is, right now we have a moment where for better or worse like we look to the trans 
community for, uh, the kind of authenticity we want to see in the world, right? People, I mean, 
we characterize as like living your truth or whatever right? AJ: Sure. GH: So but that kind of, I mean, people are desperate for that kind of authenticity. 
AJ: Right. And that’s, yeah, that’s what I see the biggest contribution of all of this gender 
exploration, this gender explosion, if you will, is that it potentially will open and free other 
people up to… GH: Yeah. AJ: … live in their truth, whatever that may be, and, you know, I’m absolutely positive that, you 
know, we’re gonna have eight billion or nine billion transgender people on the planet but… GH: Mhm, mhm. AJ: … we can have people to just accept themselves as who they are. GH: Yeah. 
AJ: And live that truth and reality. I think that’s a positive example that trans, uh, identified folks 
bring to the table. GH: Mhm. Absolutely. I feel, like the trans community is teaching us how to work on yourself. 
AJ: Mhm. GH: Yeah, you know, in a variety of ways work on your health, work on your appearance, work on 
your career, work on your, you know, everything, right? 
AJ: Sure. GH: The self-work it’s like, ah, it’s everything for me. I think that’s… AJ: This conversation, this hour and a half conversation… GH: I know, I’m just like oh dang! AJ: … has been so fascinating, George. I really appreciate your willingness to, uhm, to be open, to be 
authentic as you just named, uh, and really share a lot of yourself, I mean, it’s certainly not all of 
yourself… 
George Hoagland Interview 
GH: [Laughs]. Right. AJ: … cause it’s only an hour and a half, and you’re life is much more, uh… GH: Maybe not actually. [Laughs]. That’s pretty much it. I love snacks. That would be the only thing I 
would… [Laughs]. AJ: Okay, snacks are good. GH: [Laughs]. Snacks are good. AJ: Well, thank you so much, uhm, I, I am deeply honored and, uhm, until we meet again my friend. GH: Oh, thank you so much, Andrea. Thank you for all your work. This is such an amazing important 
project. So thank you. AJ: Wonderful. Peace! GH: Peace. That was awesome. 