Rebecca Kling 
Narrator 
Andrea Jenkins 
Interviewer 
Andrea Jenkins -AJ 
Rebecca Kling -RK AJ: So, my name is Andrea Jenkins and I am the oral historian for the Transgender Oral History 
Project at the University of Minnesota, archives and special collections. Today is January 25, 
2016. I’m in Chicago, Illinois, and I am speaking with Rebecca Kling. So, Rebecca, why don’t you 
introduce yourself, spell your name – some Rebecca’s go with one “c”, some go with a “k”, all of 
those things. So spell your name for our transcriber, tell me your preferred gender pronouns, 
your current gender identity today, and your gender assigned at birth. 
RK: Rebecca Kling ... I’m going to start that sentence over so it’s a complete sentence. I am 
Rebecca Kling, R-e-b-e-c-c-a, K-l-i-n-g. I use she/her/hers pronouns. I identify as a woman, 
sometimes as a trans woman. I identify as trans, sometimes that’s a part of my gender identity, 
sometimes it’s not. I am from Chicago, Illinois. 
AJ: Wonderful. And your gender assigned at birth? 
RK: Oh, I’m sorry, I was assigned male at birth. 
AJ: Tell me about this whole ... you know what? We’re going to talk about that in a little bit. I 
want to start us out with just you thinking about what’s the earliest thing you remember in life? 
RK: The earliest memory I have is probably of the room I had ... so my family moved all within 
Evanston, that’s the first city north of Chicago. 
AJ: Right on the lakeshore. 
RK: Yeah, so we moved a couple of times but it was all within Evanston. So until I was six or seven, 
we lived in South Evanston, and I would say my first memory is probably of the room I had that 
overlooked the back yard and I can remember sort of where my bed was and where I was in the 
hallway down, with my parent’s bedroom on the other end and my brother’s bed along the way 
– not even a specific event or anything, but just sort of that space feels very deep and old in my 
memories. 
AJ: About how old would you say you were? 
RK: Maybe three or four. 
AJ: Good. So you went to elementary school in Evanston? 
RK: I went to King Lab, which was Martin Luther King, Jr. Experimental Laboratory School, everyone 
called it King Lab. I went their K-5 and part of the reason my parents had moved to Evanston 
was they were ... and I’ve talked with them about this, I’m not putting words in their mouth, 
but they were doing what they felt like good, liberal families do – they were moving to a diverse 
city with a diverse school district and liberal politics. And so, King Lab was a magnet school, so 
people from all over the district were there. 
AJ: Did it have anything to do with Northwestern University? RK: I don’t think so, at least I don’t remember that. I bet there were Northwestern students there 
as teaching assistants and that sort of thing, but I don’t remember any specific relationship with 
Northwestern. 
AJ: I only ask because the University of Chicago also has a lab school. 
RK: Right, they have their lab school. No, this is an Evanston public school. Unfortunately, at the 
time I was there, Evanston School District was starting to do some of the consolidating that a lot 
of school districts have had to do and so it wasn’t ... the classroom sizes were growing a little 
bit from its heyday and the organization of the school wasn’t quite as cohesive and feeling as 
politically active in terms of wanting to be a better space for all sorts of students. And it was still 
a good school, but it wasn’t what my parents had hoped for. I honestly can’t comment on how 
it is these days, this was 20-25 years ago. And so, I was having experiences with being bullied 
and being picked on, I wasn’t out at that time – I certainly didn’t have language to talk about 
being trans, but kids are really good at sensing differences. I was a smart kid, I was in the 
advanced classes, and that also doesn’t usually win a lot of popularity. I was having a lot of 
bullying issues in 4th and 5th grade and my parents decided to ... with talking with me and my 
input, and decided to move me to North Shore Country Day School, which is a private school on 
the North Shore. I was in North Shore Country Day School for 6th, 7th, and 8th grade, and then 
went back to Evanston Township High School, which is the Evanston public school for high 
school. So I was in public school K-5 and then had a gap for middle school and then went back 
for high school. 
AJ: Did the bullying subside at North Shore? 
RK: It was definitely ... I was not one of the cool, popular kids, but it was a much, much smaller 
class, it was a full class size – all of 6th grade, all of 7th grade, all of 8th grade were maybe 30-
people. So it was a much smaller class size and they were ... because it was a private school, 
able to be more intentional about the students they let in – which, the flip side of that is it was 
predominantly, although those exclusively, white, certainly very wealthy students and families. 
And so, I’m conflicted. On the one hand, I believe in public schools, I believe in the idea of public 
schools, I believe in funding public schools. I think that was the right decision for me at the 
time, but I ... and the bullying did definitely go down, there was much more active supervision 
of students and so there sort of couldn’t be the type of bullying and threatening to get beat up 
and that sort of thing that I was having at King Lab. On the other hand, both of my parents are 
also fans of public schools – my mom taught for many years in a public school and so that was a 
hard decision for them to feel like they were doing, what I do think was the right thing for me, 
for their child, but a little bit at the expense of their politics. 
AJ: Wow, we have to make sacrifices sometimes in life and even sometimes around our own values 
around things. Did you have siblings? 
RK: I have an older brother. I have an older brother who is about two and a half years older than me 
and he went to King Lab, K-12, and then also went to Evanston Township High School, so he was 
a senior there while I was a freshman. AJ: Hmmm. So, when was the first time you recognized you there was sort of a difference in the 
way you were assigned at birth and the way you felt like being in the world? 
RK: So the language I’ve come up with is that I always knew boy was wrong for me, but it took me a 
lot longer to figure out what would be right for me. The analogy that I use is that we all have 
the experience of tossing and turning at night trying to get to sleep and we know we’re 
uncomfortable but we aren’t sure how to get comfortable and fall asleep. And that’s sort of 
what boy felt like for me. I knew it was uncomfortable but I wasn’t sure how to position myself 
or what might be right to be comfortable. Part of that was I didn’t have language. I think labels 
are a double-edged sword but I do think there’ something incredibly powerful about finding a 
word that describes you and feel like, “Oh, this is me and this is how I make sense of myself in 
the world.” And growing up at the very beginnings of the internet and certainly before anything 
like Laverne Cox or Janet Mock or Transparent or Orange is the New Black or The Danish Girl. 
AJ: All very recent developments, I’m just going to throw out there. 
RK: Yeah, I could do a laundry list. Growing up before all of that, I didn’t have an idea that trans was 
a thing and as I started to get an idea as a late adolescent, early teen ... 11, 12, 13, when I 
started to get online, on aol at the time – so this would have been like 1993, 1994, 1995. The 
way that trans identity was talked about was very black or white – either you hated your body 
and hated your genitalia and knew who you really were and knew what you wanted and knew 
you wanted surgery and knew you were ready to leave your friends and family behind to get it, 
or you didn’t. And there was no middle ground. And as an 11, or 13-year-old who had 
parents who were explicitly liberal and who were in this liberal community, it didn’t feel like ... 
the people online saying, “To be trans is to give up all of your life,” that didn’t ring true with me, 
but I didn’t know enough to say, “No, no, no – it doesn’t actually have to be that way.” And 
similarly, as a teenager who was discovering that masturbation is pretty fun, the things that I 
was reading online that said to be trans you have to hate your genitalia and you have to hate 
your body ... there were things I hated about my genitalia and about my body, but it wasn’t this 
sort of vitriolic sense of ... the language we would use now is dysphoria. 
AJ: Yes. 
RK: I felt that, but not in the way these people online were talking about it. And the other thing is, 
the voices online due to privilege and due to access to technology, were primarily older white 
trans folk, mostly trans women. And their stories are important and their stories are valid and 
their stories are true, but they weren’t my story. And so to read things online about their stories 
and that being the only idea of trans experience, didn’t totally make sense to me. And that, I 
think, in retrospect, shouldn’t have made sense to me because my experience as a 10-year-old 
growing up on the north side of Chicago in the 1990s is very, very different than someone who is 
growing up in the 1950s or 1960s or 1970s. 
AJ: Right. Wow. 
RK: That was a long answer. As a performer and as a storyteller, those are the only kind of answers I 
give. If you need me to keep things shorter, please feel free to ... 
The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies 
University of Minnesota AJ: No, that’s fine – expand and say what you need to say. So from that sort of long-winded 
answer, which is beautiful, I think you expressed some things that I certainly haven’t heard 
expressed in this project that I’ve been working on. So there was no specific time or moment 
that you said, “Hey, I am not this, I am this.” 
RK: I don’t remember a light switch going off or a snap of, “Oh, that’s what it is.” And part of that, 
I’m an over thinker, and I know that about myself, and so because online I was finding these sort 
of checklists – so to be really trans you have to fit all those things, and I didn’t fit all those things. 
It took me until my early 20s to finally work with a therapist and work with friends and worth 
with the community to say, “No, no, no, no, no – it’s not a checklist, you can figure it out – it’s a 
pick or choose.” So I started using language of, “I think I might be trans,” as early as or 16, 
but it wasn’t until my early 20s that I said, “No, I actually want to try hormones, I want to try 
transitioning,” because the narrative I was reading, what I was being told ... and the narrative I 
sort of constructed for myself was, “If you transition, you’ll end up ...” or, “If I transition, I’ll end 
up ugly, I’ll end up masculine, I’ll end up unloved, I’ll end up unlovable, my parents won’t like me 
or love me anymore, my friends won’t like me anymore, I’ll be unemployable.” And that was all 
terrifying as a ... you know, owning my privilege as a privileged white male presenting person, 
who didn’t necessarily want to lose all of those things. 
AJ: Yeah. 
RK: And so it took a while before I was able to figure out, “OK, that narrative being sold was coming 
from a place of truth, but wasn’t my truth.” 
AJ: Awesome. Did you sort of go through an array of terminology or language to sort of describe 
who you felt you were? 
RK: The language I used for a long time was, “I think I want to be a girl,” because the baggage 
associated with trans and transgender and transsexual didn’t feel right yet. And, as an over 
thinker, I was really scared of saying, “I want to be a girl.” That felt very definitive and solid and 
like I knew what I wanted. I knew if a genie came or if I had a magic spell, that I would change 
my body and be a “real” girl, but that the path that it felt like was laid out for me didn’t feel 
realistic or like something I was ready for. So the language I used for a long time was, “I think I 
want to be a girl.” And then for a while I said, “I think I might be trans or transgender,” and it 
wasn’t until my late teens or early 20s that I was able to say, “No, this is the word that’s right for 
me. I’m still not sure what to do about it, but this is the word that’s right for me.” 
AJ: So you never tried on sexual orientation sort of identity? 
RK: No. 
AJ: Like, “I’m gay.” 
RK: I was always certain enough and confident enough that my attraction lies mostly with women or 
femme-presenting folks. I think part of that, for me, was ... because since I’ve transitioned I’ve 
had sexual experiences with men and really had a lot of fun. 
AJ: Yay! 
The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies 
University of Minnesota RK: At the time, it felt like part of ... being with what felt like at the time, another man – another 
male-bodied person, felt like it would be re-enforcing me as male because it would be this gay 
experience, and that didn’t feel right or good and so I didn’t really ever explore sexual language 
that I know some other trans folks do. 
AJ: OK, wow. What have been some of the more positive aspects of expressing your true gender 
identity? 
RK: I think the most positive is feeling more settled in my body. I get, as a storyteller – as a 
performer, I get frustrated with some of the clichés around trans identity – that transitioning 
makes us feel more at home in our bodies, it makes us feel more complete, it makes us feel 
more whole. I’ve thought a lot about the language of transitioning and the metaphors we use, 
and to some extent I feel like we use those because the experience is sort of indescribable – or 
at least for me, it’s sort of indescribable, of feeling more like my body belongs to me. And so, at 
its core, the best thing about transitioning and about expressing a more authentic gendered 
experience and identity, is being able to look in the mirror and like more about what I see, or 
being able to be in the shower and like my body more, or being sexual with partners and liking 
that more or standing in front of a group of people – friends, family, total strangers, and feeling 
more seen as who I feel I am. Specifics, I definitely think the activist and political network that 
I’ve become connected with, I’m incredibly grateful for and that the work that I’ve been able to 
do as an artist and as educator and as an activist, I feel grateful for. I would like to think that I 
would still be involved in some of that if I had not been trans, but I don’t think I would have 
been involved to the extent that I am because it’s part of who I am. 
AJ: Sure. 
RK: And then I would also say the way that my coming out has impacted, fortunately positively, the 
relationships in my life. It certainly took time for my parents to get onboard with me being trans 
or with me transitioning, but we now have incredibly strong relationships. It took some time for 
friends from high school and college to sort of understand what that meant, but I’m still very 
close with a lot of my friends from high school and college. I know that’s relatively rare in the 
trans community and I feel very grateful and lucky. In part, I do think that’s a reflection of sort 
of where and when I grew up. 
AJ: Yeah, the generation, the geography. 
RK: Absolutely. 
AJ: All of those things. Where did you go to college? 
RK: To Northwestern, so I stuck around. I, in part, still wasn’t totally sure what I wanted to be doing. 
I was interested in theatre but wasn’t calling myself a performer or an actor because I was 
getting cast as male roles when I was. I wasn’t totally ready to leave home. I lived on campus, 
so I wasn’t still at my parent’s houses – my parents split up when I was in high school, but it was 
close enough to feel familiar. I’ve actually lived in or around Chicago my whole life. 
AJ: Wow, that’s great. What have been some of the challenges that you’ve encountered since 
expressing your truer gender identity? 
The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies 
University of Minnesota RK: The fundamental challenge is figuring it out. As I said, the language for me wasn’t there and the 
role models weren’t there. I feel very strongly that part of the way we find ourselves is through 
story, that we see stories where we are reflected, we see stories where we aren’t reflected, we 
put ourselves in stories. My roommates have a 6-year-old, and he loves telling stories and 
hearing stories and placing himself in stories. That’s a human thing, and so not having that felt 
very isolating and very alienating – to not be able to ... and this is part of what’s so important 
about some of the stuff coming out these days, to not be able to look at a bookshelf or open a 
magazine or look on TV and see someone who is like you. And this is something that people 
doing diversity work have known for decades. This is not a new thing that trans people have 
suddenly discovered. 
AJ: Right, no. Yeah, Black people have been talking about this ... 
RK: This is not a magical new problem. 
AJ: Right. 
RK: I think beyond that, the hardships of navigating the world as trans and, on the whole, I have 
been incredibly, incredibly lucky. My parents never threatened to kick me out, they never cut 
me off financially, they never uninvited me from holiday events. I’ve always been stably housed 
and stably employed. As a trans person, I am really fucking lucky. At the same time, I’ve 
experienced the slurs and sort of street harassment that all trans people I know have. I was 
fired from a teaching job in 2010 for being trans, which in the state of Illinois is illegal, but again 
as people who have been fired for bullshit reasons can tell you, if you do something over the 
phone and then later change why it was done, it’s real easy to get away with stuff like that. 
AJ: Sure, yeah. 
RK: And then I would say ... 
AJ: Did you pursue a legal remedy to that? 
RK: Absolutely. I went to some employment lawyers in Chicago, I went to the EEOC, the Equal 
Employment Opportunity Commission, I went to the Illinois state and federal departments of 
education, and a number of them said, “We want to do work around this, we are ready as 
organizations to do work; however, when we reached out to the school, they said it was for a 
different reason.” So the reason I was told is that I was bringing ... my presence in the 
classroom was bringing up uncomfortable conversation and that students were asking about my 
deep voice and big hands – and they’re not huge. 
AJ: Yeah, not at all. 
RK: But when, I think the EEOC was the one who tried to pursue it, when they called the school, the 
school said, “Oh, it just wasn’t the right fit.” And because it was all over the phone, the EEOC 
said to me, “We are not saying that you weren’t discriminated against. We’re saying we don’t 
have the evidence to pursue a claim.” So absolutely, I did try. 
AJ: Which is heartbreaking. 
The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies 
University of Minnesota RK: Yeah, it was ... I think the first time in my life that I had had someone explicitly say to me, “You 
are not good enough for this because you are trans,” which feels very different than abstract 
politicians who say horrible things or religious leaders who say horrible things or people on 
Twitter or Facebook or websites or the news, because there’s something removed from that – 
they’re talking about trans people in general being icky, and even street harassment they’re 
talking about in general. They’re not saying, “We got to know you, we watched you teach a 
class, and we don’t want you to teach it.” What I try to take from that is, again – if that’s the 
worst thing that’s happened to me as a trans person, I can still count myself incredibly lucky. 
And so I try to take from that fuel to motivate and anger myself politically to push for more 
protection and more rights and more safety and all of the other things that we know the trans 
community needs – and other communities need. I think that that’s one of the things that I’ve 
tried to take as well – of, this was a new experience for me, this is not a new experience for lots 
and lots and lots of people both in the trans community and people who are people of color or 
who are women or who are disabled, or any of the long, long laundry list. And so, I’ve tried ... 
but it took me a long time, it took me almost a year, to sort of emotionally move from the pain 
of that to fueling me to do the work. 
AJ: So, I happen to know that ... one of the reasons for us meeting today is because you are on the 
host committee for the NGTL Creating Change Conference 2016. 
RK: It’s a long name – yes. 
AJ: What was that experience like? Share some of the highlights of, I would suspect, a year or close 
to a year of planning that you guys did to put together this great conference. 
RK: So the way Creating Change works ... 
AJ: And how does that play into your activism? 
RK: Absolutely. The way that Creating Change works is that it’s in a new city every year – it’s in a 
different city every year, and that they work with a volunteer host committee in that city to help 
lay some groundwork. And so the host committee is asked to help solicit workshop proposals 
from local people, so to make sure that when they’re in the city that that city is represented, or 
that area – that part of the country; to help fundraise from local businesses and organizations; 
to attend local events and street fairs and festivals and stuff to flyer for Creating Change; and 
then the big thing that I was involved with was community housing. 
AJ: OK. 
RK: So people can apply through the – or could, it’s not closed and not yet open for next year, but 
could apply through the Creating Change website to say either, “I want to host someone who 
couldn’t otherwise afford to attend,” or, “I want to apply for housing,” for people who couldn’t 
otherwise attend. 
AJ: “That’s the only way that I could attend.” Yeah. 
RK: And that was the bulk of my involvement on the host committee. I was a little bit involved in 
some of the conversations with the trans hospitality suite, which was a suite at the hotel for 
The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies 
University of Minnesota Rebecca Kling 
trans folks and gender non-conforming and intersex folks could go to hang out and have a safe 
space and food and conversation. I think the goals of the host committee are really wonderful. 
For the task force to acknowledge that we don’t know your city, and the people who are there 
are going to do the best job of reaching out to individuals and reaching out to organizations and 
reaching out to the community and making sure that that part of the country is represented. It 
did feel sometimes ... I was not one of the four co-chairs of the host committee who had the 
most contact with the festival ... not the festival, with the task force and with Creating Change, 
so I can’t speak for them. It felt like there were moments of the task force asking a lot of the 
host committee and not always providing the resources that I would have liked to see. I 
certainly don’t think any of that was malicious or intentional, but I’m certainly hoping to have 
conversations with some of the task force staff to provide that feedback. I know they worked 
their butts off, I know ... or I can only imagine, putting up a conference like this is a huge beast 
of an undertaking, but there were moments where it didn’t feel like they fully grasped the work 
that the host committee was doing or how much work the volunteers were dong. 
AJ: Wow. 
RK: And maybe I’m wrong, maybe that’s not true. I certainly think, again, that the task force staff 
works incredibly hard and I don’t want to sound like I’m not appreciative of that work – I’m 
absolutely appreciative of that work. I do think those lines of communication could maybe be 
better and the way that the host committee is worked with could maybe be more actively 
supported. 
AJ: So, this is your interview – not my interview, but I will say that they’ve been hosting this 
conference for over years. 
RK: Twenty-eight years. 
AJ: Twenty-eight years. So I’m pretty sure they have a good sense of the level of commitment that 
it takes for a local community to help them put this conference together. 
RK: That’s true, that’s legit. I appreciate that. And I think it’s easy ... one of the things, having 
nothing to do with the task force, but just was frustrating to see this week, as we’re coming out 
of Creating Change, was, and we talked about this a little before we started the interview, sort 
of forgetting to assume good intent. And so, because I didn’t see something doesn’t mean it 
wasn’t happening. And maybe there is a way for the host committee and the task force to have 
those lines of communication be better so that the feeling of that might be different even if the 
reality is the same – if that makes sense. 
AJ: Sure, absolutely. 
RK: Because I appreciate that reminder, that Creating Change has been going on almost as long as I 
have been alive and that I don’t want to come in as someone who has only been working this 
past year and be like, “What are you doing? You don’t know what you’re talking about? I 
clearly know what I’m doing better than you.” 
AJ: No, and I’m just saying that in support of your ... I think it’s wonderful that you lead with good 
intent. Rebecca Kling 
RK: I try to. 
AJ: Exactly. And I don’t think it’s malicious at all, but I think they have a very solid awareness of 
what it takes to make this happen – and it’s a lot. 
RK: The specific thing that I’ll say that was a hiccup, and that feedback I’m going to give, was there 
were moments, specifically with community housing, there were moments we asked for what 
people had done in the past – so who did you reach out to? How did those emails look? What 
was the structure? What was the timeline? And we didn’t get a ton of information about that. 
So that’s some ... and that may be, again, it may just be that they didn’t have that, that the past 
volunteers, tooting my own horn, weren’t as organized as we were. 
AJ: Yes, exactly. 
RK: So one of the things I want to make sure I do, as part of that community housing, is give some of 
that information to say, “Next year in Philadelphia, here’s what I think the housing folks should 
know. Here’s the timeline that made sense, here are ways we reached out, here are the emails 
and what they looked like, here’s how the spreadsheet worked,” so that they can take that or 
leave that, but at least ... one of the things that I can only imagine what must be frustrating at 
the task force, is because they move from city to city every year and because the volunteers are 
so different every year, it must be really difficult to build that institutional memory of what did 
they do in Denver last year? What did they do in Houston the year before? And if those 
volunteers don’t give it to them, they can’t magically just know. 
AJ: Wow. Well, it sounds like part of your activism is organizing the movement and we need that. 
So, thank you, Rebecca. 
RK: Absolutely. 
AJ: To the extent that you’re comfortable, and you’ve already sort of alluded to and touched on 
some of this, talk about medical interventions, the importance; what have you done, sort of 
personally ... and again, to the extent that you are comfortable. 
RK: Absolutely. One of the things that I find sort of ironic about my transition is when I started – for 
me, that means when I started going to a therapist to talk about gender in my early 20s. That, 
for me, felt like the start of my transition. I went in not knowing what I wanted. I didn’t know 
that I wanted to go on hormones, I didn’t know if I would want surgery, I didn’t know if I would 
want hair removal. I didn’t know what I wanted and one of the things that I found frustrating 
about some of the stuff that I read about trans identity is it said, “You have to know, and it has 
to be everything or nothing.” 
AJ: Right. 
RK: And the therapist that I worked with said, “No, it’s an ala cart model, you can pick and choose 
what you want.” 
AJ: Did she have like a menu? Rebecca Kling 
RK: She didn’t, but she talked like that – like, “You don’t need to do more than you want to do.” 
And, if you start to do something and don’t like it, you can change your mind. A lot of the things 
we talk about with medical intervention is eventually permanent, but it’s usually not permanent 
from day one – and learning about it is never permanent. 
AJ: Right. 
RK: Getting information about hormones isn’t going to change your body in any way. And so what I 
find sort of ironic is as much as I wasn’t sure about any of that, I ultimately did all of it. I had 
laser hair removal on the vast majority of my body – on my face, my neck, my chest, my 
stomach, my arms from my elbows down, my legs down to my toes, and in preparation for 
gender re-assignment surgery, around my genitalia. I had hormones – both estrogen, 
testosterone blockers, progesterone. I didn’t have top surgery because I lucked out with how 
the hormones worked for me -so this is me and a little bit of Victoria Secret. And then ... 
AJ: We’ll do a tight shot of your very well-blossomed chest. 
RK: Why thank you. And then I did have gender re-assignment surgery a little over two years ago. 
That was all because it felt right for me when I was there, not because I started on day one 
saying, “This is what I want.” And some people do that ... and that’s OK. Some people who 
say, “I’m going to have hormones and I’m going to have hair removal, I’m going to have top 
surgery, and I’m going to have bottom surgery, and I’m going to have facial feminization surgery 
and I’m going to have a trach shave.” If that’s what is right for them, that’s totally OK. I would 
never want to say that my way was the right way to do it. But I do think the wrong way, and 
what I encountered, was saying, “Everyone should do it the same way.” 
AJ: Yes. 
RK: And so, those decisions that I made were all scary at the time. I went into my therapist saying, “I 
don’t know that I want this,” and she said, “Well, you don’t actually have to decide to take 
hormones today, you can get more information and then make an appointment with the doctor 
– and then keep that appointment with the doctor, and then get a prescription from the doctor, 
and then fill that prescription.” For me, the idea of breaking it down into smaller steps felt 
much, much, much less scary. To be able to say, “All right, tomorrow, I’m going to a doctor to 
talk about estrogen,” rather than, “I’m doing hormones, I’m going on hormones – it’s all or 
nothing.” And so, for me, the medical intervention that I underwent felt very methodical like 
that – this goes back to I’m an over thinker, so it felt very cautious and careful. Fortunately, I’ve 
always been insured and so the doctor’s appointments and the estrogen weren’t unaffordable 
to me. And, my parents have been incredibly, incredibly financially supportive. So my parents 
have paid for most of the hair removal I underwent. I would need to go back and sort of 
calculate, but certainly $10,000 or more over a decade at this point. And then when I decided 
that gender re-assignment surgery was right for me, I was able to use a combination of savings, I 
did some fundraising with friends, I did a fundraising event where we had a big party, and family 
support. My insurance did not cover my gender re-assignment surgery, but I also was able to 
avoid going $20,000 into debt – and again, that’s the definition of privilege, of having financial 
resources to be able to do that. Rebecca Kling 
AJ: So clearly, you’re aware of the privileges. 
RK: I try to be. I think, to some extent, I can’t be aware – I can’t know what it’s like to not have the 
privileges that I have, but I try to be conscious of that. 
AJ: That’s awesome. So what’s your ideas and thoughts about ... because you named at the 
beginning of your medical transition was therapy. So, how long did you engage in therapy prior 
to some of the more permanent aspects of hormone therapy, hair removal, gender confirmation 
surgery? And, you sort of spoke on this a little bit, but I really want to dig into a little bit about 
this idea of therapy versus non-therapy because some people are just like, “I know who I am, I 
know what I want, I don’t need to spend time sitting in a doctor’s office or psychiatrist’s office.” 
What’s your thoughts about that? 
RK: Sure. So, going back to my experience with therapy, I had panic attacks and anxiety disorders as 
a kid and had horrible, horrible panic attacks and went to therapy as a teenager to try and work 
on that, and ultimately did successfully work on that through breathing and visualization 
exercises and talk therapy. I haven’t had a panic attack, knock on wood, in a decade and a half. 
AJ: Nice. 
RK: That was the first adult I came out to, that therapist. I used that same language I said earlier, “I 
think I want to be a girl.” I give him a lot of credit for not making it worse. He didn’t say there 
was anything wrong with me, he didn’t say he was going to try to fix it, but he also was very 
open in saying, “I don’t know a lot about this.” And so talking with him was useful in that it 
didn’t ... it felt validating to feel like you’re not broken, but ultimately what I was looking for 
was an adult or some sort of authority figure to say, “This is how it can work.” And he didn’t 
have the knowledge to do that. And then I went to another therapist in my late teens, who was 
supposed to specialize around trans issues and gender and identity and who said because I 
didn’t fit that mold, because I wasn’t hating my body, I wasn’t certain I wanted surgery, I was 
attracted to women mostly, that I probably wasn’t trans. And that was really damaging, 
because at that point I thought I knew who I was, I just wasn’t sure how to act on it – and this 
was an authority figure saying, “No, no, no, no – that’s wrong.” And it wasn’t until a couple 
years later that I found a therapist who said, “Yeah, you probably know who you are better than 
I do, here are some options that you could pursue if you want to.” And for me, that was really 
valuable. I was not ready to say I know what I need. I was looking for a knowledgeable figure, a 
therapist in my case, to help me figure that out. And for me, that was incredibly important and 
valuable. I don’t question other people who don’t have that experience. I think that the 
gatekeeper model of saying, “You need a therapist to prove you’re really trans,” I think that’s 
horribly problematic. I certainly agree with the informed consent model of saying, “Here are the 
risks, here are the rewards, you’re an adult and you can make your own decision.” I was not yet 
ready to take control of my transition in a way that informed consent felt right for me. I was too 
uncertain and scared in saying loud and proud, “I am trans,” and that transitioning medically is 
what I want, that it was important for me to have that sort of therapist to talk me through it. 
So, it was probably ... I started seeing this therapist my junior year ... no, the beginning of my 
senior year of high school, and started taking hormones the middle of my senior year. So it was 
probably four months between when I started seeing her and when I decided I wanted to try Rebecca Kling 
hormones. I feel like I’m a broken record, but I would say again – that was the right decision for 
me. I think having that option of an affirming therapist is incredibly important. I don’t think, 
moving on to your next question, that it needs to be a requirement or should be a requirement. 
And by the time, five or six years later, I decided I wanted to start looking into surgery, by that 
time I thought the need for me to see two different therapists and get letters from each to 
prove to my surgeon that I was trans and this was the right decision, seemed silly to me – 
because at that point I was solid enough and certain enough and sure enough in who I was and 
what I wanted that, fortunately I was able to say this to my therapist because we’d been seeing 
each other ... I’d been seeing her for five or six years and we had a good relationship. I was 
like, “I need this letter from you, I think it’s dumb that I need this letter but I want to go through 
this process with a surgeon that I want to go to and this surgeon is requiring this.” 
AJ: Where did you have surgery? 
RK: I had surgery with Dr. McGinn is based out of New Hope, Pennsylvania – it’s about an hour north 
of Philadelphia. 
AJ: OK. Pleased? 
RK: Oh, absolutely. So the one thing I would say about Dr. McGinn as a caveat, is she is a very blunt 
person. She is not a warm bedside manner, touchy-feely doctor. 
AJ: OK. 
RK: For me, I heard that beforehand, I met with her before I decided to have surgery with her – 
which is another financial privilege, that I was able to fly out and meet with her. My mom went 
out with me, so I was able to have sort of this advocate with me. 
AJ: Team mom. 
RK: Yes. So for me, I didn’t feel like I needed a surgeon who was coming to my bedside and making 
sure that I had ... I’ve heard of Meltzer in Arizona, apparently has really good ice cream as part 
of the post-op care, and I didn’t feel like I needed that. 
AJ: Dr. Toby Meltzer. M-e-l-t-z-e-r? 
RK: I think so. And so in terms of the medical care I received, I think it was phenomenal. The 
surgery went very well, the recovery time felt accurate to what I had been told – which was 
about three months of feeling less and less bad, and then about three months of actually 
starting to feel good – but up to a year or so before being done with recovery. So that felt 
accurate. Both for my own self looking in mirrors and from partners and lovers I’ve had, feel like 
the results are aesthetically pleasing and I can have orgasms and get myself off ... 
AJ: Nice. 
RK: ... and feel like the results are ... I don’t know, functionally pleasing – that sounds really weird 
and clinical. So, the one thing I would say about someone looking at McGinn is going with ... I 
would strongly recommend anyone going for surgery to have someone with you because 
afterwards you’re on morphine and you’re exhausted and you’re hurting, so you want someone Rebecca Kling 
there who can help. I would say with McGinn, in particular, it was not a touchy-feely 
experience. I don’t mean that as a negative, I just mean that as like ... she’s a bad-ass, she was 
a naval flight surgeon and is trans herself. 
AJ: Oh really? 
RK: Yes. She was qualified to fly in the space shuttle, although she never went, but she got 
astronaut training. I like her a lot as a person and I think she’s a great doctor, but I could 
imagine someone who didn’t have a strong support there -didn’t have their mom there, didn’t 
have a good friend there, being a little more scary. I don’t know – does that make sense? 
AJ: Absolutely, yeah. I would advocate for the same thing and strongly encourage people to have 
some support in that process – for any surgery, actually. 
RK: Yeah, I agree. 
AJ: So just thinking back a little bit over your decision to express your true gender identity, were 
there any pivotal moments that you can point to and would you do anything differently? 
RK: Pivotal moments? I think coming out to my parents was a pivotal moment, both positively and 
negatively. So, I came out around using that same language, “I think I want to be a girl,” and 
my mom said, “We’ll love you no matter what,” and my dad said, “We’ll love you whatever you 
are as long as you’re not a Republican.” 
AJ: OK, got it. 
RK: I have my dad’s sense of humor. 
AJ: Yeah, we heard you dad. 
RK: On the one hand, that is incredible that before any of these groups and before any of the 
conferences and camps that exist now for trans youth, that their immediate and intuitive 
response was, “We love you.” At the same time, they didn’t know what to do about it. It wasn’t 
in What to Expect When You’re Expecting and there weren’t books about trans youth and there 
weren’t books for parents with trans youth and there weren’t groups for parents to go to and 
there weren’t conferences for trans youth issues. I work with Camp Aranu’tiq, which is a camp 
for trans and gender-variant youth – that certainly didn’t exist. 
AJ: Camp ...? 
RK: Aranu’tiq. A-r-a-n-u apostrophe t-i-q. 
AJ: OK. Where does that happen? 
RK: That’s out of New Hampshire and then we rent a space in California. We have our own campsite 
in New Hampshire. And it’s phenomenal – I’ve been working with them for the last four years 
and I’m now on the leadership staff there. It’s 80-120 trans and gender-variant youth canoeing 
and arts and crafts and drama, and drama, and singing songs and hiking in the woods and doing 
archery and field games. The founder, Nick Teich, is a trans man and went to Girl Scout Camp Rebecca Kling 
growing up and feels very strongly about camp as a space for people. So it’s intention ... it’s 
not group therapy, it’s not political activism camp, it is summer camp. 
AJ: Sure. 
RK: And as much as I’m a fan of therapy and activism training, I do think there’s huge value in being 
able to have kids in a place where they can be just kids. And so none of that existed or 
years ago when I was coming out to my parents. 
AJ: For trans kids, right? 
RK: For trans kids specifically – where everyone there, all the counselors ... or rather, all the 
campers and about half the counselors are trans or gender variant. 
AJ: Does it happen on each coast? 
RK: So there’s one-and two-week sessions in New Hampshire and then there’s just a one-week 
session in California. 
AJ: That’s fascinating. 
RK: Do you want to come be a counselor next year? 
AJ: I was not aware of this project, I’m pretty sure I would not have time to come be a camp 
counselor but thank you for the invitation. 
RK: Absolutely. And so, going back to coming out to my parents – on the one hand it was amazing 
and positive, and on the other hand, they didn’t know what to do. When I wanted to learn to 
ride a bike, they knew what to do about that; when I wanted to play the piano, they knew what 
to do about that; when I said I wanted to be a girl, they didn’t know what to do about that. And 
it was reassuring that they weren’t going to kick me out or try to change me, and again as a 
trans person, those are very real possibilities when coming out to parents as a teenager. On the 
other hand, I do look with some jealously at these kids who are 14,15, ... 7, 8, and are 
transitioning and wonder if I had been born a decade later, years later, if that would have 
been my experience. And so I don’t know that I ... I don’t know that I could have done anything 
differently there, I wish the world had been different. In terms of what I wanted to do 
differently, I wish I had felt more confident in knowing who I was ... not even knowing, 
believing I knew who I was. So when I saw that therapist as a late teen, and she said, “No, 
you’re probably not trans,” I wish I had had the confidence to say, “You’re wrong, can you help 
me get on hormones?” And now as someone in her early 30s, the difference between and 
feels like less than it did at the time – at the time, the difference between and feels like an 
epic-ly long time, so I don’t know that there are huge life decisions I would have made 
differently, but I do wish I had felt more confident earlier to say what felt true to me. And I 
certainly wish that the world had been different and better and that there had been more 
resources for me and my parents. 
AJ: Right, right. Love, relationships, dating while trans, sexual orientation. Rebecca Kling 
RK: So I’ve always been mostly attracted to women and so in high school and college, I dated a 
couple of cis women – a couple of whom I was not out to and one or two who I was. And those 
relationships were very important in that ... particularly the one that I had later in college, it 
was someone who I was out to before we started dating. It had never occurred to me that 
someone might actually be attracted to me once they knew I was trans. And this was before I 
had started transitioning. And so that was very ... I don’t know, a moment of growth of, “Oh, I 
can be seen as attractive,” and, “I can be seen as sexual.” And as I started transitioning, we 
continued to date – that sort of validation there. That relationship didn’t work out for a lot of 
reasons – part of it was dating someone while transitioning is really hard, and dating someone 
who is transitioning is really hard. The language I’ve started to use ... 
AJ: Dating someone who has transitioned is hard. 
RK: And that we don’t transition at other people – like my transition was not about the person I was 
dating, but it certainly impacts the people in our lives. 
AJ: Oh yes, absolutely. 
RK: Since I’ve, at least, socially transitioned, because I continued to date before I had surgery and 
while I was in that process, I haven’t had a ton of long-term relationships. I’m really quite out, 
you can Google Rebecca Kling and the first thing that comes up is my artist website and the third 
word is transgender ... maybe the fourth word, “Rebecca Kling is a transgender artist ...” Fifth 
word. So not only am I not stealth, I’m pretty darn out. And so, in terms of dating while trans, 
I’ve never really had to navigate the idea of how or if to tell someone because I lead with it 
pretty early. Again, that’s been the right decision for me. I don’t question or disagree with 
anyone who handles their disclosure differently. On the one hand it makes things a little easier 
because I don’t have to deal with disclosure; on the other hand, I’m sure I’ve lost out on 
potential ... I know I’ve lost out on potential hook-ups or relationships where someone might 
have been more interested in dating me if I had rolled out my trans-ness a little later. And so I, 
again, feel pretty lucky in my dating life. I more feel like being an activist and being a touring 
artist impacts dating because I’m out of town quite a lot and my schedule is really hectic. 
AJ: That can do it. 
RK: So living in a big city like Chicago where there is a pretty solid queer community, being of a 
generation that uses online dating as a tool, and saying how it is – as someone who has 
relatively high passing privilege, I feel like dating has not been super difficult for me. And in that 
way, again, I keep using ... I’m not the type of person to use the word blessed, that word 
doesn’t resonate with me, but privileged, lucky, fortunate in sex and dating as well as in a lot of 
other places. 
AJ: Wow, that’s good. So there’s been some impacts but certainly it hasn’t completely ... 
RK: No, I have not found that my dating life has died because I’m trans. 
AJ: Yeah. Are you involved in a long-term relationship now? Rebecca Kling 
RK: No, the last long-term relationship I was in ended over the summer and was ... I forget if it was 
eight or nine months, and that was the longest relationship I’d been in since this woman that I 
dated in college. And it was lovely – we weren’t right for each other ultimately, but it was nice 
to be in a stable relationship for a while. It’s been a number of years since I’ve had that and the 
frustrating thing is, now that it’s over I’m like, “Oh wait, I do like that – I do like being in 
relationships, I do want that.” 
AJ: So you were reminded ...? 
RK: Yeah. So now that Creating Change is finally over and I have some brain cells left to think about 
things other than organizing Creating Change, I do want to think about how and whether it’s 
online dating or meet-up groups or hitting up friends and saying, “Hey, set me up with that cutie 
that you ...” 
AJ: Sure – well, good luck. 
RK: Thanks. 
AJ: Have there been times when people have either been super, super helpful or super ... really 
insensitive in institutional spaces? So, like Northwestern University or the medical industrial 
complex, or the criminal justice system. 
RK: Yes, although – again, on the scale of bullshit that trans people have to deal with, on the lighter 
end. So ... 
AJ: I just want to stop and say -yes, life is infinitely worse for a whole bunch of people, but we’re 
really just talking about your life. If I get a hangnail, that really hurts me – that is not the same 
as getting my hand amputated, but no one should minimize my own pain. 
RK: I appreciate that validation. I think ... I get very frustrated with activists, in particular with trans 
activists who lose all sense of perspective and so I may be erring too far on the side ... so I 
appreciate that reminder. 
AJ: That’s fine, I just wanted to point that out. 
RK: Thank you. So a couple of things that come to mind – first of all, the therapist who told me that 
I wasn’t trans, that’s super problematic. Giving her the benefit of the doubt, I assume she’s 
working with an older model of trans experience and trans identity where being trans means 
something very narrow and small and boxed. I think that’s bad, I think that’s a problem. Other 
things I can think of – I was fired from a teaching position for being trans. 
AJ: That’s pretty bad. 
RK: Fortunately, it was not my only source of income, it was a part-time thing. It wasn’t my primary 
source of income but it was both emotionally and financially horrible. 
AJ: Yes. 
RK: Beyond that ... so in 2010, I had my gall bladder removed. I found out I needed my gall bladder 
removed by going in through the ER. I went into the ... I had, usually about once a month or so, Rebecca Kling 
horrible, horrible stomach pain. Both sides of my family have a history of gastrointestinal issues 
so I sort of just assumed it was that and maybe when you’re you can’t drink and eat the same 
way you do when you’re 18. 
AJ: Sure. 
RK: And, went to the ER one night and after being there for maybe six or seven hours, from maybe 
2am to or 9am, was discharged and was told I had horrible constipation and that was it. I later 
found out, when I went to the ER again a month later, that I had a disgusting number of gall 
stones, that my gall bladder was infected and it needed to be removed. And when I asked, and 
this was at a different ER, when I asked at that different ER, “Could this have developed in the 
last month?” They said, “No, this has been brewing for years.” I went back, after I was 
discharged and everything, I went back to the first ER and said, “Hey, what the hell?” 
AJ: Right. 
RK: They said, “Oh, on your chart we noticed that you had gall stones, but we didn’t feel it was 
medically necessary to tell you.” I will never know if that had anything to do with me being 
trans. Nothing that happened to me there was explicitly transphobic. I never had a doctor say 
anything problematic to me ... 
AJ: They weren’t mis-gendering you? 
RK: I don’t remember. I was tired ... 
AJ: You’re in pain – yeah. 
RK: I don’t remember being mis-gendered. I remember having to answer the same question over 
and over again about why I was on the drugs that I was on – I was on estrogen and testosterone 
blockers. 
AJ: The person that came in the room was like, “Hey, you’re taking a whole bunch of estrogen.” 
RK: Right, but that didn’t feel harmful at the time, it just felt like nurses who hadn’t been clued in. 
AJ: Right. 
RK: I’ve wondered since then, though, if they sort of just wanted to get rid of me as a patient. This 
was before I’d had gender re-assignment surgery. I was still presenting socially and my name 
was legally Rebecca, but I’ve wondered since then if they sort of wanted to get rid of me. It was 
interesting, the contrast at the other hospital that I went to – I had been there, again I grew up 
in this area so I’d been there as a kid, so when they pulled my name up in the system it was my 
old name. And so when they printed wristbands for me, it was my old name and my mom was 
furious about that. I think she just wanted something to be angry about because her baby was 
in pain. But I was very impressed – within half an hour, someone from HR and said, “We 
apologize profusely, we’ve updated our records, we’re printing you a new name band.” I don’t 
remember having any other problems. And so that sort of contrast. In terms of the legal system 
or criminal justice system, when I went to legally get my name changed, I didn’t have any 
problems – the judge was just sort of a jerk and kept calling me sir. So he didn’t hold up the Rebecca Kling 
name change, it went through fine, but that was sort of a douche-y thing to do, an asshole thing 
to do. 
AJ: Yeah, he sort of let you know his personal feelings or whatever – yeah. 
RK: Beyond that ... oh, so about Northwestern. Now I know from talking with students and folks 
who work at Northwestern, they have better resources. When I was there, I didn’t feel like they 
had particularly good resources for trans folks. The LGBT groups I went to were really just LG 
groups. The housing certainly didn’t have any trans-inclusive housing, the women’s ... I 
reached out to a number of organizations on campus looking for resources and they all sort of 
sent me to stuff in the city. Which – we live in a city that has some good resources, so sending 
me to Howard Brown and the Center on Halsted was fine, but I know now, almost a decade 
since I’ve graduated, that Northwestern does have more resources on campus – at the time, it 
really felt like the attitude there was, “We’re not against trans folks, but we have nothing to 
offer you.” 
AJ: Right. 
RK: Which isn’t the worst, it’s a step towards being better, but was really frustrating. 
AJ: But it wasn’t personally directed or ... 
RK: No, not that I remember. It was more just I emailed the Women’s Center, I emailed the LGBT 
group looking for resources, and they said, “Oh, we wish we could help you, but we really don’t 
have anything.” 
AJ: Who was the first trans or gender-queer person you encountered or met? 
RK: Definitely online. 
AJ: OK. 
RK: And I remember talking with folks through message boards and talking with folks through AOL 
Instant Chat or talking with folks through ICQ – none of which exist ... well, all of which exist 
but none of which anyone uses anymore. 
AJ: Yeah. 
RK: Those are still companies that exist. And then when I was in high school going to an LGBT group 
and sort of talking with the adult organizer, who – at the time seemed so much older than me 
although was probably like to my, like, or 15, and she gave me Gender Outlaws, Kate 
Bornstein’s book. 
AJ: Oh, OK. 
RK: And that was really eye opening and sort of feeling like, “OK, there are other people that have 
these experiences, not all of them are as negative or as awful as some of these websites I’m 
reading seem to say.” Unfortunately, there wasn’t anyone else in the group at the time who 
was out as trans, and so it wasn’t until I was in college and starting going to stuff at the 
Broadway Youth Center, which is a great Chicago organization, that I met other people my age Rebecca Kling 
who were trans. I remember at the youth group in high school, we had some trans speakers 
come but they were later-in-life transitioners in their 50s who I didn’t feel like their experience 
was super relevant to mine. 
AJ: Right – yeah. I get that. 
RK: So it wasn’t until I was in my late teens or early 20s that I felt like I met other trans people, in 
person, who were sort of like me. 
AJ: So you were a theatre major. 
RK: Performance studies. 
AJ: Performance studies. 
RK: A difference only important to performance studies majors. It’s like theatre with more paper 
writing. 
AJ: Exactly. But you are a performer and you’re sort of interested in this whole process around 
casting and so forth and so on. I just want to hear your thoughts around all of the hullabaloo 
around cis gender characters playing transgender roles in Hollywood. 
RK: Absolutely. First and foremost, I don’t think any group should be able to have a monopoly on 
telling that group’s story, so I think it is, in general, OK for trans people to tell narratives with cis 
folk, cis people to tell trans narratives, for someone of a different racial experience to talk about 
stories of that race or gender or ethnicity or age, or whatever. However, if you’re telling a story 
that is not part of your legacy and history, you need to be really careful and intentional about it. 
And so, the objection that I have isn’t right out, “This is a trans character played by a cis person,” 
it’s that it’s a trans character played by a cis person who they didn’t do their research or is 
poorly written or is offensive for other reasons. Jen Richards, who is an activist and now a 
screenwriter whose first web series was just released, has said ... 
AJ: Her Story. 
RK: Her Story, which is phenomenal. 
AJ: Yes. 
RK: That part of her objection of some of ... like transphobic jokes in sitcoms, isn’t only that they’re 
offensive, it’s that they’re lazy writing. That if that’s the joke you’re making, you haven’t 
thought through this character very well. And I think some of my objections of things like Jared 
Leto in Dallas Buyer’s Club, or that sort of thing, isn’t only that it’s a cis person playing a trans 
role, but that it’s a cis person playing a really lazily written trans role that is reductionist and not 
very creative. 
AJ: Right. 
RK: So I think with what is going on in Hollywood right now, the important thing to me is that trans 
voices are in the room and are involved in the process. If the best casting decision is then a cis 
person, I’ll be disappointed but I don’t think that inherently means the director is transphobic or that the project is awful. I think the contrast with things like Jeffrey Tambor in Transparent, where it’s not a perfect show, but they are clearly trying. They have hired trans folks and they have cast trans people in supporting roles, and they have hired a trans writer for season two. None of that automatically means that the show is good or that the show is above criticism, but the way Jeffrey Tambor has talked in interviews and the way that it is Jill Soloway’s story of her parents transitioning make it feel like it is a nuanced and truly told story rather than something like Dallas Buyer’s Club where it’s a magical trans person who is helping the cis person learn a lesson. I feel like those are very different things. I would always like to see more trans voices as acting, as casting agents, and as writers and as producers and as directors and as all of the above, but I don’t, as a performance studies major, I do think it’s appropriate to approach it with some nuance. I can understand why people don’t have the patience for that – like nuance takes time and is sometimes really hard. So I can understand the trans activist who is saying, “There should only be trans people playing trans roles.” I don’t agree with that position but I can totally understand where they’re coming from. 
AJ: Wow, thank you for that insight. 
RK: Absolutely. At some point when you’re not interviewing me, I want to hear your take. 
AJ: Sure, absolutely. I’d be happy to share it. What do you think about the relationship between the L, the G, the B, and the T? Clearly the first three letters I identified are sort of sexual orientations, transgender, gender non-conforming, gender queer ... no, gender queer is sort of vacillates between sexual and ... 
RK: It depends on the individual person. 
AJ: Right, sexual orientation and gender identity. But, what do you think that relationship is? Is there a need to really sort of hollow out the T and develop a separate movement or can we all continue to sort of work together, if we ever have? 
RK: I think yes to all of the above. I think from a political standpoint, from an activist standpoint, they have to be together because when a kid is getting bullied in school or when someone is being harassed in the bathroom, or when TSA is giving someone a hard time at the airport ... 
AJ: It’s about their gender. 
RK: ... they do not care if you’re really trans, they care how they see you. And so, to talk about LGB rights without talking about trans rights, and vice versa, is ignoring the ideological problems of that because I think we do better when we ban together, is just politically short-sighted because . .. if, hypothetically, you get a non-inclusive ENDA passed, you get an employment non­discrimination act passed without trans people, you’re still going to see cis gay people getting fired for being too femme, or cis lesbians getting fired for being too butch, because the bigots don’t care. So from a political standpoint, from an activist standpoint, it seems incredibly foolish and short-sighted. From an ideological standpoint and from an emotional standpoint, it also ... I’m interested in intersectional justice to begin with, and so I want my trans rights to also be gay rights and my gay rights to also be labor rights and my labor rights also to be racial rights and my racial rights also to be prison rights and my prison ... and so, to talk about these finely grained distinctions, I don’t think ... it’s not the direction I hope our movement is going anyway. I do think, from an education standpoint, it is important to make that distinction to talk about why sexuality is different than gender identity and how sexuality is different than gender identity and that not all trans people are gay or straight or asexual or bisexual or queer or whatever, not all trans people are anything. And so I think there needs to be, and should be, conversation and organizing within the trans community that is just trans, but I think that should be towards the goal of a trans rights movement that is also all of those other things – gay rights and race rights and labor rights and immigration rights, and all of that jazz. Shifting back to Creating Change this week, one of the big disruptions, protests, arguments that happened this week at Creating Change, was between a group around LGBT Judaism and Israeli LGBT activists and around anti-Israel and activists who were talking about Palestinian rights. I think a bit part of the disconnect there was the idea that they aren’t ... they can’t be the same thing. There were accusations that activists on behalf of Palestinians are inherently anti-Semitic or that activists on behalf of LGBTQ Jews in Israel are inherently anti-Arab. And some of them are, to be sure. But I bet the vast majority of them, if they sat down face-to-face with each other, could find more common ground than difference. Maybe that’s naïve of me, maybe that’s optimistic of me, and so I think in terms of the LGB versus the T, it feels incredibly foolish and short-sighted for the LGB folks to say we don’t want anything to do with the T because when someone’s throwing a brick or you or firing you, they don’t care – they don’t care the difference. And it seems hypocritical for the T to talk about trans rights without talking about those other things because trans people are also gay and lesbian and are also people of color and also are immigrants and are also all those other things. 
AJ: Wow. 
RK: So that’s my soapbox answer. 
AJ: That’s a great answer. Kind of winding down a little bit, you sort of flowed into my next question, which is great. So what do you think the agenda should be for the trans community going forward? 
RK: I think it’s really great you’re empowering me to make this decision on behalf of everyone. 
AJ: Of the entire community – you get to set the table. 
RK: We had a vote, everyone chose me ... oh God, that’s terrifying. I think any civil rights movement needs to focus on the most at-risk, which is clearly, in this moment in the United States, trans women of color – particularly, Black trans women. Everyone needs to be involved. As I said, as a white privileged trans woman, I was still fired and that’s still problematic. My privilege does not shield me from ever being a victim of bigotry. And so saying we need to center the voices of trans people of color, particularly Black trans women, doesn’t mean we can afford to forget about all the other trans people. 
AJ: Sure. 
RK: But I think all of the ... if one, can’t see the way that racism still plays out in every level of American society, that person is looking at a different country than I am. And so, I think all of the civil rights work that we’re talking about in terms of labor rights and in terms of immigration rights, in terms of prison reform, in terms of all those ... that whole laundry list of stuff. If a big part of that isn’t people of color, it’s not a movement that I feel excited about supporting. Again, as a white activist, I hope that my voice is useful and can be included and that there is absolutely work that needs to be done for white folks too. Transphobia isn’t only against trans people of color, but I think the trans rights movement, as well as the larger LGBT movement, has to have, and is having, some of those difficult conversations of we have a lot of organizations that have been built over or years from the gay rights movement, which was primarily a white cis movement, in large part because they pushed out trans people and people of color. And so then how do you shift from organizations like HRC or NCTE, which is a trans organization, or the task force or any of these other organizations that have been run and funded by wealthy white cis folks for, in some cases, decades. And, emotionally I can understand a wealthy white cis person saying, “Well, why should my money be going towards this other thing?” Again, I think that’s short-sighted and , but I think the conversation that us white folks need to have, us white folks, is how do we sell that to other people, and how do we sell, unfortunately I don’t have the money to fund HRC or to fund the task force, or to fund whatever this is – so how do I sell the people who do, on this idea of solidarity as more than just lip service, of actually putting their money and their resources where their mouths are. 
AJ: Wow. Have you ever worked for or volunteered for any trans or LGBT organization other than Camp ... what’s it called? 
RK: Camp Aranu’tiq. 
AJ: Aranu’tiq or the task force on Creating Change? 
RK: I’ve worked peripherally with a ton. I’ve worked with About Face Theatre which is a Chicago LGBTQ theatre and they do wonderful work. I’m on the board, although this relatively recent so I’m still getting my sea legs, I’m on the board with the Illinois Safe Schools Alliance, which is an organization working for youth safety, particularly in schools, around LGBT issues. And I love the way that they approach the intersectionality of their work – that they have been set up, they were founded in part by Queer Women of Color, that have been set up to value diversity because it makes us stronger not because it is checking boxes on what a group should look like. I’ve worked a little with MCTE and I’m certainly friends with a bunch of folks there, I haven’t done much work with HRC or the task force, outside of Creating Change – I would love to if anyone is hiring. If anyone is hiring, please email me. 
AJ: Yes – we’ll be posting your head shot and all of that stuff later. Awesome. Man, we’re really winding down here. Last question ... actually, let’s do a couple more. Caitlyn Jenner, the most visible transgender identity on the planet right now, arguably. So Caitlyn Jenner invisibility, you started out the interview talking about Janet Mock, Laverne Cox, the really, sort of, increased mainstreaming of transgender identity. I want you to speak specifically about Caitlyn and what her impact is, but also just more broadly about the visibility and how that is impacting the 
movement. 
RK: So Caitlyn specifically – I think what frustrates me in some of the anti-Caitlyn sentiment from the trans community, is a lack of empathy. Absolutely having a billion-plus dollars, I don’t know that she has that much money, but having millions and millions and millions of dollars makes your life a lot fucking easier, as does being white. And so, no question – Caitlyn Jenner has a lot of ways in which her being trans is easier than possibly anyone else on the planet because of the amount of money she has. On the other hand, being trans is not easy. 
AJ: 	Really? 
RK: 	What’s frustrated me ... I was in a conversation at the Philadelphia Trans Health Conference last year, so this was when Caitlyn was more in the news, and a couple people were complaining about Caitlyn Jenner and I finally said, “Is there any way she could have come out that wouldn’t have pissed you off?” They were like, “No, we just want her to go to an island somewhere and be with ...” I don’t understand that – I don’t understand that lack of empathy. You can disagree with her and you can disagree with what she says – and I disagree with a lot of what she says, I disagree with probably every political belief she holds, but I can empathize that this has been a difficult process for her – and it was hard for me walking from my car to work transitioning when I knew no one gave a shit. I can’t imagine having paparazzi chasing me down and yelling mean things to me and photographing me and putting my face on the cover of magazines. So, first and foremost, I would like to see some of the activists in our community have a little more empathy for everyone. The other thing that I think people of broadly my generation and younger, so mid-30s and younger, forget is the amount of fame Caitlyn Jenner had as an athlete before she was famous with the Kardashian clan. For me, Caitlyn Jenner was never ever an athlete – Caitlyn Jenner was part of Keeping up with the Kardashians and part of tabloid magazines and part of this sort of idea that your famous because you’re rich and famous. For people my parent’s generation who grew up seeing Caitlyn Jenner be the best athlete in the world and on the cover of Wheatie’s boxes and internationally celebrated ... 
AJ: 	That was my experience. 
RK: 	Yeah. I think we younger folks forget the value and power of having someone you saw one way coming out as trans and re-thinking that. And so shifting to the idea of visibility, visibility is not an end-all, be-all. Purely, the idea of visibility can’t fix institutional racism, can’t fix institutional transphobia, can’t change laws, can’t prevent hate crimes. But every survey has shown if you know someone who is gay, you are more likely to support marriage equality; if you know someone who is trans, you’re more likely to support trans rights. And, for a lot of people, the Diane Sawyer interview and the I am Cait TV show was a way for them to feel like they were getting to know someone who they already thought they knew – it was a coming out story for them, in communities across the country where they may not have any out trans people. Visibility can be oversold – it’s not an end-all, be-all, there are things that are more important than visibility, but I think a lot of the complaints around Caitlyn felt like throwing her under the bus from members of our own community that was actually wrapped up with a lot of legitimate class frustration and legitimate economic disparity and legitimate race frustration, and so I would love to see Caitlyn make a commitment to give away every penny of hers to trans rights groups. I would love to see Caitlyn say, “I am Cait is going to be minutes of me and then minutes of trans people of color.” 
AJ: 	Angelica Ross. 
RK: 	Angelica Ross. I would love to see that. I think that it’s not realistic and that the complaints are bigger than just her. It makes me think of ... there was some fashion magazine that did a 
Rebecca Kling 
spread with trans people and all of them were conventionally attractive and there was 
complaints online ... 
AJ: They were beautiful. 
RK: ... “such bullshit that this is just celebrating one type of trans person.” And the response that I 
saw, which I thought made so much sense, was like, “Well then let’s complain about the fashion 
industry, let’s not beat up these trans people for being celebrated.” And I started to feel the 
same way with Caitlyn, let’s absolutely complain about reality TV and complain about economic 
disparities and complain about racial divides and racial privilege, but let’s not use that to say 
that Caitlyn, who I think is trying to do the best she can, is some sort of horrible scummy person. 
I don’t think she’s done everything right, I don’t think she’s done everything perfectly, I also 
don’t think she’s the worst thing in the world – and something I’ve been talking about to people 
about Creating Change, about Philadelphia Trans Health that I think applies to Caitlyn too, is her 
existence and visibility doing more harm than good? I don’t think it is. I think her existence and 
visibility is doing more good than harm. 
AJ: Perfect. I think that’s really a good way for us to end this conversation. 
RK: Absolutely. 
AJ: Rebecca, I just want to thank you for your time and your generosity, your forthrightness and 
expressing your own personal opinions, and, the advocacy, I think, that comes through in your 
conversation. 
RK: I appreciate that. Thank you. 
AJ: Thank you, and this is Andrea signing off. 
RK: And one of these days we’ll get coffee and I’ll ask you all these questions. 
RJ: There you go. All right-y. 