Emani Love 
Narrator 
Andrea Jenkins 
Interviewer 
Andrea Jenkins -AJ 
Emani Love -EL AJ: So, good afternoon. My name is Andrea Jenkins and I am the oral historian for the Transgender 
Oral History Project at the University of Minnesota. Today is February 9, 2016. I am in Mankato, 
Minnesota, and I am here to interview Emani Love. Emani, can you just tell me your name, spell 
it for our transcriber, tell me your gender identity today, your gender assigned at birth, and 
what pronouns do you prefer? 
EL: My name is Emani Love, E-m-a-n-i L-o-v-e. My gender, I identify as non-binary, and my 
pronouns are she/they and goddess. 
AJ: Hi goddess. 
EL Hi goddess. 
AJ: Wow, thank you for being willing to sit down. I know you are in town to do a panel discussion 
around the film that you were involved in. What’s the name of the film? 
EL: The film is called Treasure, that’s the short title. The entire title is Treasure: From Tragedy to 
Trans Justice, Mapping a Detroit Story. 
AJ: OK. And essentially it’s about transgender life in Detroit. 
EL: Yup, and the film focuses around the tragic murder of one of our beloved sisters named Shelley 
Hilliard. It talks about that tragedy, what the community as a whole and the family endured as a 
result of her murder due to many oppressive intersections. The film also shows a Detroit trans 
community empowered to resist violence and to resist anything that could stop trans people in 
Detroit from having access to sustainability. So it’s a film that speaks about tragedy, but it also 
speaks about just the power and the hope that tragedy can sometimes bring about. 
AJ: Wow. I’m looking forward to watching the movie. It sounds like a very powerful story and that 
it documents sort of the lived experiences of trans women in Detroit, trans women of color I 
would suspect. 
EL: Yes. 
AJ: So, Emani, tell me about your earliest memory. What’s the first thing you remember? It doesn’t 
have to do anything with gender identity, although if it does that’s perfectly fine. But I just want 
to know what’s the first thing you remember in life? 
EL: I think of ... I’m going back as far as I can, one memory that I do have – I couldn’t have been no 
more than maybe three or four years old, and I remember my mom threw me, I have a twin 
brother ... 
AJ: Oh, wow. 
EL: Yeah, and my mom threw us a birthday party and I just remember there were several cakes and 
there was just an aluminum pan full of hot dogs and just all kind of food. We were just eating so 
much and we were having fun. I remember that vividly but also vaguely in some ways. AJ: Yeah, you sound like you were pretty young. 
EL: Yeah, that’s one of my earliest memories that I can recall. 
AJ: Is that right? Where did you grow up? 
EL: I grew up in Detroit – technically, Highland Park, but Detroit for real. 
AJ: Highland Park is kind of like a neighborhood in Detroit. 
EL” Yeah, it’s ... 
AJ: Or is it a suburb? 
EL: It used to be a suburb, there was a time you had to have money to live in Highland Park, but 
over time, with the downfall of ... kind of economic downfalls. 
AJ: The auto industry. 
EL: Yup, and the car industry was originally used to be run out of Highland Park, we have the historic 
landmark – the Model T Ford factory where the first car was made. 
AJ: OK. 
EL: In Highland Park. It’s actually a city much like Detroit – an uprising architecturally and business- 
wise. 
AJ: Nice. So you feel like Detroit is on the rebound, on its way back. 
EL: Yeah, the rebound that I think of when I think of Detroit, is people ... it’s just really community 
work -community healing and community effort, I’m so blessed to witness so many movements 
just blossoming – everything from food justice and urban farming to trans justice having more 
visibility in the city of Detroit. I’m seeing so much as far as our activism and organizing. 
AJ: That’s wonderful. 
EL: And that’s where I see our restoration. 
AJ: Right, right. So, you said you grew up in Detroit or just right outside of Detroit, and you have a 
twin brother. Do you have any other siblings? 
EL: Yeah, I have four siblings, one of whom has joined the ancestors. 
AJ: Oh, I’m sorry to hear that. Does your twin have any sort of gender alternative struggles going on 
in their life? 
EL: No, he is a straight up cis hetero and he is wonderful. I love him. We’ve come a long way as far 
as understanding and acceptance. 
AJ: Are you guys identical? EL: No, we’re fraternal, but we favor each other for sure. We’ve come a long way with 
understanding and acceptance and I’m grateful for the relationship we have. He’s nothing but a 
blessing to my life. 
AJ: Wow, that’s wonderful. 
EL: And that’s a blessing to be able to say because that’s not the reality for a lot of trans people. 
AJ: It absolutely is not. What about the rest of your family? Your mother and ... did you grow up 
in the house with your dad as well? 
EL: No, I didn’t grow up with my dad, it was mostly my mom and her partner and my brothers 
mostly, and my uncle. 
AJ: So what’s the relationship with your family like nowadays? 
EL: I have an appreciation for my family. Of course there are some of them who are still stuck and 
their consciousness has not quite shifted to be as fully understanding and loving as they could 
be towards myself or any other trans person, for that matter. But I definitely sense growth and 
I’m just appreciative, always, for love, kindness and respect when I’m with them. I think things 
are still ... my family as a whole, myself included, are still growing to really understand each 
other, to be able to communicate more efficiently, to be able to support each other – we’re still 
growing in that regard and I’m just grateful that that growth is even happening. 
AJ: Yeah, no – that’s a beautiful thing. So I’m going to go just deep and personal, so you can still go 
to your mama house on Christmas? 
EL: Hm-hmmm. Oh yeah. 
AJ: All right, that’s good. Relationships with families are always complicated no matter what your 
gender identity is. But we do know that statistics say that trans people who, trans and gender 
non-conforming people, who have relationships with their families tend to do much better in life 
in terms of creating that safe and sustainable situation that we all deserve. So, I’m glad to hear 
that there is some relationship there. When was the first time you sort of realized that you 
were not on this gender binary that you were assigned at birth? 
EL: I was about ... I was about years old, I was just getting ready to transition out of middle 
school and I just ... I used to wear bracelets up to my elbows, I used to wear all the color that I 
could get away with because that’s what resonated with me. Yeah, things that our society 
deemed as feminine, I’ve always kind of tried to incorporate into my mannerisms and my 
appearance. 
AJ: Wow. And you expressed that in middle school or high school? 
EL: Yeah, yeah – in middle school. I could not help it, I guess. Maybe I did it in a way that was not 
absolutely dissatisfying although maybe it was disappointing to a lot of the adults – the adults in 
my life at that time. 
AJ: Did you feel like you were hassled or bullied or harassed by your classmates and people in your 
neighborhood? 
The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies 
University of Minnesota EL: Yeah, I think I definitely ... like a lot of trans people have had to deal with. I dealt with 
classmates who were just totally disrespectful and ignorant, for that matter. Of course, dealing 
with transphobic slurs throughout, that still happens. But yeah, definitely. I can recall times to 
where I was enraged and even saddened, just by people perpetuating stigma and perpetuating 
ignorance by saying unmindful things. 
AJ: Wow. Were you able to stay in school and graduate from high school? 
EL: No, I dropped out of school in the 9th grade just due to not personally feeling safe. I went to a 
school ... the high school that I attended, which was not very long, I don’t think that I may have 
even gone to school there – not even days, probably much less than that, and I just 
remember just feeling very uncomfortable. There were questions around my gender, most 
people ... I was and I think most of the students assumed that I was female assigned at birth 
and may have thought that I was a lesbian who was just a bit more on the masculine side 
because I had feminine mannerisms, I kind of tried to maintain my physical appearance as 
feminine as possible, but I still had no ruling over what clothes I could buy so I was wearing male 
clothing so that’s what made them ... 
AJ: Right. 
EL: And that just kind of made me feel unsafe a little bit and I was also just ... at that time I was 
experiencing some hella depression, still coping with my family not being even adequately 
resourced to support me and love me the way in the most efficient way. 
AJ: Sure. 
EL: So yeah, I dropped out of school in the 9th grade and I was about 15. Later on, at about 17, I was 
out of school and I went into an alternative school to try to make up some credits to get my high 
school diploma and even that didn’t work. I had some hassles with some students, like there 
were some students who were uncertain about my gender and many various things, and I got 
tired of it – I had a big blow-up and I just said, “Fuck this.” 
AJ: Right, right. 
EL: And I ended up leaving that alternative school but I was fortunate enough to meet with an 
educational counselor at Wayne State University who helped me to get into a community 
college, so I was able to ... I’ve done two years of community college so far. 
AJ: Wonderful, that’s good to know. What terms do you use to describe yourself? You said a little 
bit in the beginning but tell me about this non-binary identity. 
EL: Yes, so non-binary, what that means, for me, is that I don’t understand my gender in a category, 
I understand my gender very fluidly. I affirm my femininity, I affirm my masculinity, I embrace 
them both, I’m willing to explore both. And, I think basically ... that’s what it means to me. 
AJ: That’s what it means to you. 
EL: Yeah, just being able to embrace my body and embrace every part of me, and just feeling that 
out. I think right now, at the age of 22, I embrace the term non-binary as a way to just affirm 
The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies 
University of Minnesota who I can become. I don’t know where I will be as far as understanding my gender in years, but I embrace the journey. 
AJ: Wow, that’s beautiful. So that’s a pretty complex, very well thought out analysis that it would seem that it would take some time to get to that label or that identity. How have you identified in the past? 
EL: In the past, when I first started ... I’m sorry, let me think back. I always felt very feminine and so just the idea of being a girl always resonated with me. So, for most of ... so since probably the age of until, even until now, I’m just coming to a place of understanding myself as non-binary, but I’ve carried the identity of being transgender for a long time. I still honor that as a part of me, but I do not label myself as that specifically just to reserve room for those who that identity really is their reality and experience. 
AJ: Wow. So, you’ve never took on the label of like a lesbian or gay person? 
EL: No ... well, I guess I used to call myself gay, just before I knew anything. 
AJ: Right, OK. That’s what I was trying to get at. So you’ve talked about some of the challenges that you’ve had since you began to express your true identity, primarily with school. Have there been other challenges for you, Emani? Employment? What are some of the challenges that you’ve faced as a non-binary identified person? 
EL: I think ... yeah, for a long time I understood myself as a woman and that journey, specifically, I, of course, faced a lot of emotional turmoil just dealing with it. When you know in your heart and soul who you are, for anyone or anything to tell you otherwise is just so unsettling and it puts you in a bad space. I’ve definitely had my share of micro-aggressions related to gender, I’ve had my share of missed pronoun and mis-gendering. Yeah, I’ve had to experience a lot of the backlash of daring to be anything other than the binary. 
AJ: Wow, what about some of the joys. Have there been some joyful moments in this journey for you? 
EL: Yes, I can definitely say it’s ... I never knew anyone who was not binary growing up, everyone I knew was binary. 
AJ: Right, exactly. Males over here, women over ... 
EL: I remember it was so funny, in the 8th grade it was so hilarious ... it was so funny, my instructor told the boys to line up on one side and the girls to line up on one side, and I stood in the middle. 
AJ: Ohhh. 
EL: Because I’m like, “Bitch, you’re not about to ...” 
AJ: “You’re not about to put me on blast like that.” 
EL: “OK, I’ll just ...” 
AJ: Wow. EL: Yeah, I think a lot of the joy is that I was able to find one home in the community that was really 
beautiful – just embracing all of the rachetetness and all of the beauty and spirituality of the 
trans black -queer and trans community. 
AJ: Yes, wow. That’s awesome. So is that like a house – like the ball housing or ... when you say 
you were able to find a house or home? 
EL: The home basically, just being able to be around people who were like me in some ways. We 
were able to empathize with each other on certain levels. I’m not a part of the ballroom scene 
specifically, but I have been involved a lot throughout my work and outreach with the Ruth Ellis 
Center. 
AJ: OK. So you worked at the Ruth Ellis Center? 
EL: I worked at the Ruth Ellis Center for three years. I just recently transitioned out this past Friday. 
AJ: Is that right? Wow. What did you do there? 
EL: Ahh, a lot. I started off as an outreach worker in the drop-in center, they have a drop-in center 
program that is open three days a week. They serve hot meals, have a food pantry, shower 
access – just basic services for the LGBT community in Detroit. I started off doing outreach and 
later on down the line we got funding ... there was a program facilitated by Monica Hudson, 
she is a prominent member of Detroit’s ballroom community and she did a powerful program 
for trans women of color in Detroit called, “Girl Talk.” 
AJ: OK. Girl Talk? 
EL: Yup, it was called The Girl Talk Retreat and I went to it a number of times when I first started 
going to Ruth Ellis. I think my first one may have been 2012. 
AJ: OK. 
EL: And it was beautiful, it was just all these amazing trans women, trans femme people, trans 
feminine people just living out loud, living boldly, having a real conversation. It was beautiful 
and I got hired later on down the line after I had completed the summer internship as an 
outreach worker. So that was my role for the three years, as well as the trans Just Us 
coordinator. Trans Just Us was a program that was inspired ... Trans Just Us is a continuation of 
the Girl Talk Retreat. Trans Just Us is for ... there are two retreats held every year for trans 
women of color in Detroit and I was the facilitator of that for the three years that I was there. 
AJ: Awesome. Wow. So, Ruth Ellis Center is LGBT Center for Black, queer identified people, or is it 
open to all gay, lesbian, bisexual and transgender? 
EL: It’s open to everyone, it’s open to everyone non-binary basically and even those who are binary 
can be in a space to affirm and respect who the space is for. But, I’m sorry, primarily Black LGBT 
people in Detroit. 
AJ: OK, yes. 
The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies 
University of Minnesota EL: Yes, Ruth Ellis Center is really dope. I definitely appreciated my time there, even transitioning 
out is bittersweet. I’m going to miss those connections, I’ll miss being up there with my people, 
just carrying and kiki-ing and having fun. I was basically ... I wasn’t even doing ... I wasn’t even 
working sometimes, I was just chilling. 
AJ: At work having fun, this is my life, right? 
EL: Yes, and it was so beautiful. I was grateful to have done it. Yeah, Ruth Ellis Center, they work 
with the Black LGBT community specifically in Detroit with a particular focus on LGBT youth 
homelessness. 
AJ: OK, that’s awesome. Wow. To the extent that you feel comfortable, if you don’t want to 
answer this question don’t, but have you undergone any medical interventions in your journey 
of becoming, or do you consider ... are you considering any medical interventions? 
EL: No, I haven’t had any medical interventions. I definitely was ... I thought for a long time and 
I’ve come to a place of peace with not really finding it necessary for me to undergo medical 
transition. 
AJ: OK, wow – that’s cool. Have there been any specific people or moments or organizations that 
have had a big impact on you related to your gender identity? 
EL: For sure. I can think of a couple. One, of course, being the Ruth Ellis Center. Another ... I’ve 
been blessed to be able to travel a lot and see a lot of the country and connect with amazing 
people. I’m grateful to have met organizers for the Trans/Gender Non-Conforming Intersex 
Justice Project based in Oakland. 
AJ: Oh yeah, yeah, yeah. 
EL: TGIJP. 
AJ: Yes, exactly. 
EL: And they are amazing. I’ve met Danielle Woods, who is an amazing comrade. Janetta Johnson. 
AJ: Janetta, yes. 
EL: My auntie Janetta and Mama Major. 
AJ: Mama Major. 
EL: Yes. 
AJ: We love her, Miss Major. 
EL: Miss Major, I love her. And yes, even I was blessed to go to a youth organizing summit in 
that the organization based in New York called FIERCE, they organized the summit for youth of 
color organizers and it was really dope and I got to meet amazing people there and I got to 
connect with ... some of my favorite organizers in this movement are based in Chicago. So, I 
got to meet a number of amazing people who work with YWEP, the Young Women’s 
Empowerment Project before they underwent their dissolution process. 
The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies 
University of Minnesota AJ: Yeah, I love YWEP, they were really good. Y-W-E-P – Young Women’s Empowerment Project. Yeah, I’m sad to see them go away. 
EL: Yeah, but the work and legacy still lives on – they just transformed. 
AJ: Yes, yes. Wow, drop some names. 
EL: Oh my goodness – Dominique, who worked with YWEP, that’s my baby – I love her. I love her, that’s my baby. Shira Hassan is an amazing ... I got to meet Angel Torres and Akea Torres, they were both youth organizers with YWEP. I got to meet the amazing Coco Ma. 
AJ: Coco Ma. 
EL: Yes, she is definitely an inspiring Black woman. 
AJ: Have you been in touch with her at all lately? 
EL: She reached out to me, I haven’t got a chance to really communicate back to her, but I’m going to definitely hit her back up. But, I was fortunate to meet her through my experiences. 
AJ: Because some people can get traumatized by this movement and I think, unfortunately, Coco Ma got sort of caught up in some of the drama that happens in our community. 
EL: There’s always something. I think sometimes even ... I think being critical has a place, and I think that, you know, can we go about being critical in a loving way, I wonder sometimes because I think sometimes we can really overlook ... we can really overthink things and be really critical of things and not even know simple details, but have a hell of an opinion. That’s just one example of trauma that could happen in movement work. 
AJ: Yes. Talk to me about romance and love and relationships. How do you identify sort of orientation-wise, are you in a relationship right now? Do you want to be in a relationship? What’s going on? 
EL: Yeah, I’m not in a relationship currently. As far as my attraction, I definitely appreciate cis male bodies, but I appreciate all masculinity and I’m comfortable with ... I don’t think gender necessarily is a cap on for me when it comes to attraction. I identity as pansexual, so just whatever the vibe is, if the vibe is appropriate then you know ... 
AJ: If it feels good. 
EL: If it feels good. 
AJ: If it feels right. OK. Have you had any people that have been really helpful or insensitive related to the medical community or the criminal justice system or even the educational system? We’ve talked about some of this already, like school was not really a great experience, but then you met this person at Wayne State who sort of helped you get back into school. What about in some of these other institutions like the medical system or criminal justice system? 
EL: Yeah, in the medical system I have witnessed myself and other trans people experience a number of ... just totally so much discrimination and it’s just unacceptable. I’m always reminded about how much shift in consciousness needs to happen around gender in so many of Emani Love 
our institutions. I’m starting to notice ... it’s powerful to even notice when there are changes 
and language in the medical industry on how they reference trans and gender non-conforming 
people. I think it was ... was it last year? I don’t remember, probably about two years ago, I 
was on my way back from Kentucky from doing an event and we went to Cincinnati, Ohio, and 
they had a hospital, like a transgender wellness clinic for trans youth as young as, I believe, four 
or six. 
AJ: Wow. 
EL: Yeah, just young children having medical support, to support their child in however they wanted 
to identify and I found it to be so powerful and beautiful. So that’s just one example that 
definitely needs to be more widespread. 
AJ: Right, right. 
EL: But the fact that it exists is powerful. 
AJ: Yes. I’m going to take a little break here for one minute. 
EL: OK. 
AJ: So, we’re back and we’re just going to finish up with the last few questions. I love that idea that 
you talked about with the young people and the medical facilities. What do you think is going to 
be the next trend in transgender movement and identity, particularly as it relates to young 
people coming up? 
EL: I think ... it’s really powerful, like I’m starting to notice just trans people just getting younger 
and younger. It’s just beautiful. They definitely still have their share of bullshit, but the fact that 
trans people are getting positive and consistent mainstream visibility is really ... the 
mainstream visibility that the trans community is getting at large, I think, is definitely an 
important piece of the gender revolution. What I’m starting to notice is that people are starting 
to understand, especially a lot of youth and elders alike, are just starting to understand that 
human beings are much more complex than any binary and no matter how someone 
understands themselves, it is OK. And that’s, for some, not enough because we still have violent 
trans people, just an obscene amount of violence even still. One trans life lost is too much. 
AJ: Absolutely. 
EL: So I think what I’m starting to notice is that when it comes to education, that a trans identity is 
starting to have much more of a ... discussions around non-binary identity and attraction at 
least are starting to become more relevant and more prevalent in education, and I think that 
that will absolutely continue to take place. I feel like when we solidify supportive structures for 
trans youth in our schools and education system, when it becomes so widespread that ... I 
would like to see our educational systems reach a place to where no youth is bullied and no 
young person is bullied because of their gender or attraction is not ... whatever, the norm, the 
binary – whatever that bullshit is. 
AJ: Yeah. What do you think about the relationship between the L, the G, the B, and then the 
TGNC? So the lesbian, gay, bisexual versus the transgender non-conforming? EL: 	Yeah, I absolutely understand why we would want to be very clear that there is a total difference between attraction and gender, so I appreciate the T ... is it TGNCI? 
AJ: 	Yeah, you could say that. I meaning intersex, right? 
EL 	Yeah, it is what it is. I think we face different struggles. You know LGB people have a different journey than transgender non-gender and intersex people. All-in-all, I think it’s important to have a healthy distinction and I think that people should be nothing but receptive to it. Anyone who is not receptive to affirming gender alone, and separating from attraction, has a lot of work themselves to do. 
AJ: 	Although recognizing that trans and gender non-conforming people do have sexual orientations 
– they can be gay or lesbian or bisexual. EL: Absolutely. AJ: Or, as in your case, pansexual, right? People do have a sexual orientation but it’s different from 
their gender identity. 
EL: 	Yeah. 
AJ: 	Do you think there is an agenda for the trans community moving forward? And, if you do, 
what’s the agenda? 
EL: 	I haven’t really thought about what an agenda is. I think, what I do know is that is our work will definitely continue and it will consistently have change and a powerful impact. So, I think if we do have an agenda that is just to create change, to transform minds, and to provide a more 
supportive healing, affirming outlook. 
AJ: 	Hmmm, wow. 
EL: 	I’m sure, you know ... I don’t know what the trans movement is going to look like specifically in the field of politics five years from now, but wherever the movement is happening there will be powerful change. I think the change piece is simply enough, as simple as that sounds, but it definitely is at the forefront of our agenda, if there is one. 
AJ: 	Yeah, yeah – I hear you. Who knows if there is a written agenda somewhere, but I think we’re all sort of moving towards human equality and dignity. EL: Right. Support trans women, give every trans women of color everything she needs and support her and give her the tools she needs to maintain and sustain. AJ: That would sort of be my agenda – at the top of my agenda. EL: Hello, let’s please ... I mean, people make shit more difficult than they’ve got to be. Be supportive, it’s that simple. AJ: So, Caitlyn Jenner is ... EL: Bruce Jenner. AJ: OK,ifyou... 
Emani Love 
EL: I’m just kidding. No, how dare she? 
AJ: Yeah, well let me finish the question and then I’m dying to hear what you’ve got to say. 
EL: Don’t put this out last. 
AJ: So Caitlyn is the most visible face for the transgender movement right now, whether we like it or 
not. She is the most famous transgender person in the world. What do you think that level of 
visibility is doing for the transgender community? Is it harmful? Is it helpful? 
EL: I hate to say it, but there’s a little bit of both. Yeah ... you know, trans visibility is trans visibility 
no matter what the color and that should not suggest that this visibility validates the 
experiences, the reality, of all trans people. Yeah, there are people who lead far shittier lives 
than Caitlyn and I think even she knows this. She definitely does have a relevant and important, 
on a mainstream scale – for sure. The work I do is much more community based and it is 
definitely absent of the mainstream. In doing that work you come across a multitude of 
powerful experiences, whether helpful or hindering experiences. And, I just ... yeah, Caitlyn 
has her place in the movement. She’s not down in the trenches with some of us, she’s just 
holding it down in the upper echelon. 
AJ: Yeah. 
EL: But she’s trying. 
AJ: We need people at all levels in the movement, right? 
EL: We need people at all levels, yes. You know what? I think the only thing that’s really stopping 
me from giving a much more thought out whatever ... articulate ... 
AJ: Response. 
EL: Yeah, is just some of my thoughts about her and some of the things that she’s said. 
AJ: Personally. 
EL: Yeah, that’s just pissed me off. 
AJ: Yeah. Well, if you won’t say it, I’ll say it. She has been problematic on a lot of issues and needs 
a lot of education. 
EL: Yeah. 
AJ: Anything that I didn’t ask that you think is really important for us to know -about you? About 
the movement? About Detroit? About trans women of color? 
EL: One thing I can say is I am like beyond just thankful to be a part ... for my movement, for my 
role in movement work being initiated in Detroit. There’s been a lot of grief and loss just in the 
recent months over trans murders, of people whom I knew closely. And, I’ll just ... I look at this 
tragedy that happens as something ... we have to continuously be active and encourage 
people. I think that simply enough, despite all of the other complicated answers that we could 
probably give – encouragement is so ... it’s a term, it’s such a simple term and a simple Emani Love 
meaning. Encouragement is something that is so powerful and when we can constantly do that, 
there are not enough people in the trans justice movement in Detroit, there are very few of us. 
The few of us that are along with our allies, accomplices, comrades, what have you, we’re doing 
what we can to hold it down and it would just be wonderful ... well, understanding the impact 
of trauma, the impact of oppression. We also have a compassion and empathy of 
understanding why people are not necessarily just throwing themselves into movement work. I 
think, for me, I’m just grateful to be a part of a community where I can constantly encourage 
other girls and other people to understand that life itself comes with sacrifice and struggle, let 
alone the movement. But we have the power to always uplift and encourage each other and I 
think there are a lot of things we have to work through around community about how we look 
at each other, how we think about each other, how we address each other, and how we love 
each other. I think that’s pretty much all I would have to say is ... yeah, Detroit’s trans justice 
movement is really something unprecedented and I’m grateful to be a part of it. 
AJ: Oh wow. That’s a beautiful way to end. Thank you, Emani, for being so gracious with your time 
and with your wisdom even ... well, I don’t know how to say this without sounding maybe 
ageist or whatever, but at years old you have shared quite a bit of wisdom today. I 
appreciate it. 
EL: Thank you. 
AJ: Until we meet again, my friend. 
EL: I stand on your shoulders girl, don’t you ever forget it. 
AJ: All right. 
EL: You paved the way for me and shit. 
AJ: Thank you. 
EL: I know it. 
AJ: All right. 