Tiq Milan 
Narrator 
Andrea Jenkins 
Interviewer 
Andrea Jenkins -AJ 
Tiq Milan -TM 
AJ: So, hello. My name is Andrea Jenkins and I am the oral historian for the Transgender Oral 
History Project at the Tretter Collection at the University of Minnesota. Today is November 2, 
2017. I am on the campus of the University of Minnesota and I am here today with the 
infamous, the legendary, the ominous Tiq Milan. 
TM: Yes, thank you, thank you. 
AJ: Good afternoon, Tiq. How are you? 
TM: Good. Iím good, Iím good. Iím happy to be here. 
AJ: Thank you so much for being willing to participate in this project. 
TM: Of course. 
AJ: Iím deeply honored and Iím just going to start out with a couple of questions for identification 
purposes. 
TM: Sure. 
AJ: Can you state your name, spell your name so that we make sure we get it spelled right ÅEas you 
said, this is for posterity? 
TM: Thatís right. 
AJ: So we want to make sure we have that correct. Can you state your gender as you define it today 
and your gender assigned at birth, and the pronouns that you use? 
TM: Sure. My name is Tiq Milan and thatís spelled T-i-q M-i-l-a-n. I identify as a trans man, I was 
assigned female at birth, and ... what was the other question? 
AJ: And pronouns? 
TM: Pronouns ÅEhe/him. 
AJ: He/him. Plain and simple. 
TM: Real simple. 
AJ: Letís just keep it real 100. I love it, I love it. Wow, Tiq. We have been in a lot of spaces together 
... 
TM: So much that I thought you lived in New York City. 
AJ: Right, yes. 
TM: Iím like, ìWhen did she move to Minnesota?ÅE 
AJ: ìWhen did she move to Minnesota?ÅENo, Iíve been living here for quite some time. But, Iím 
thrilled to get the opportunity to come out to New York City and go out and do some good work and be around good people like yourself. But, just to kind of get us going, get your memory 
bank flowing, tell me about the first thing you remember in life, Tiq? 
TM: Oh, my gosh. 
AJ: Your first memory. And, it doesnít have to be about your gender identity, although if it is, thatís 
cool because a lot of trans people that is kind of one of their first memories. 
TM: Yeah, yeah. So, one of my first memories ... I guess, Iíll start ... as Iím writing my book, I 
started with this first memory of when I was like six or seven years old and Iíd just learned how 
to ride a bike without my training wheels. 
AJ: Right, so youíre flying. 
TM: Right, Iím flying, and I used to love riding my bike. And, my mother bought me a Strawberry 
Shortcake bicycle and it was ... 
AJ: With the banana seat and ... 
TM: Girl, it had the pink banana seat and the big things ÅEthe handle bars like this, the U-shape, and 
the pink tassels. It was ... you know, strawberry stickers all over it. And, my mom was so proud 
of that bike, she was so proud of that bike. I took one look at that bicycle and I didnít know I 
was a boy, but I knew there wasnít a chance in hell I was riding that bike. 
AJ: Wow. 
TM: I knew I wasnít going to ride that bike anywhere. And so, I was just like, ìAhh, thanks.ÅEI told 
her I didnít want it. My dad took it back and he bought me a boy bike, a boy Huffy bike, and it 
had the coaster brakes and it was black and it had an orange racing stripe on it and my mother 
got me some noisemakers for the spokes. That was my first memory, and I think it sticks out to 
me, particularly as Iím doing all this writing, because I think that was the first time I was really 
affirmed in my gender even though neither me nor my parents didnít have the language. This 
was mid-1980s and this was a Black family in Buffalo, New York, a working-class family. We 
werenít talking about trans, we werenít talking about any of those things. 
AJ: There was no language. 
TM: There was no language for that then, but thatís how I was affirmed very, very early on. I think 
thatís one of my first memories. 
AJ: Thatís a great story. 
TM: Yes, thatís one of my first memories. 
AJ: And you loved that black bike. 
TM: I loved that bike, I rode that bike into the ground, until I popped the tire. And then my dad 
came over to the house and he told me he taught me how to fix a flat tire. He was like, 
ìBecause you can learn this yourself if youíre riding your bike all over the place.ÅE 
AJ: Right. 
The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies 
University of Minnesota TM: I could only ride it up and down the block. I couldnít leave the block but I would go up and 
down that block like times. 
AJ: Oh, my goodness. 
TM: But yeah, that was one of my first memories. 
AJ: Wow, that is an awesome story. Thank you for sharing that. So, you grew up in Buffalo? 
TM: Buffalo, New York, yes. 
AJ: What was that like? 
TM: You know, growing up in Buffalo was cool. Now that I go back home and visit, my parents 
bought that house back in 1976, that I grew up in. So, I stayed in one house my entire life. 
AJ: Is that right? 
TM: Then my mother, she moved ÅEgot her a big condo out in the suburbs before she passed away. 
My sister bought the house from my mom, so now my sister is there with her five children. 
AJ: Oh, so the house is still in your family? 
TM: The house is still in the family. Now I go back and I realize that we were really living in the hood. 
But, I didnít realize that growing up. I think when youíre growing up and you may not have 
everything, but if youíre full of love and your needs are met, you donít realize what you donít 
have. I didnít realize that my neighborhood wasnít great, I didnít realize that my house wasnít 
the most beautiful house ÅEit was home. 
AJ: Right. 
TM: Now, I go back and Iím like, ìWhoa, this is real. Itís real over here.ÅEBut, growing up in Buffalo 
was really cool. I really love my family; my whole family is there. My fatherís side of the family 
is huge, tons of little cousins, Iíve got three older sisters. I had a pretty good childhood, actually. 
I really did. I really did. 
AJ: Yeah. 
TM: I really did. 
AJ: Working class? 
TM: Working class ÅEyeah. My mom was a nurse and my father was a mechanic. My parents were 
split up, they probably divorced when I was three, but my father was always really active. My 
mother always said ... my parents always said they got along better once they split. 
AJ: That happens. 
TM: My dad would come over for dinner, heíd call my mom and theyíd talk on the phone. 
AJ: Right. 
The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies 
University of Minnesota TM: My father was always very active, but he was never in the house. He actually lived around the 
corner. 
AJ: Is that right? 
TM: Yeah, he lived two blocks away. 
AJ: So, you spent a lot of time with your dad? 
TM: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Back and forth, back and forth. Now, since my mom has passed, me and my 
father are really close. Heís really tried to step up to be both parents, which I really appreciate. 
AJ: And you had three sisters? 
TM: Iíve got three sisters, three older sisters. Yes. Iím the baby. 
AJ: Yeah, did they pick on your ...? Did they bully you? Were they cool with you? 
TM: My sisters are so much ... way older than me. Iím and my oldest sister is 56. 
AJ: Oh, wow. 
TM: So, she was already out of the house by the time ... my two oldest sisters are 56 and 52. They 
were already out of the house. Then, my next sister in line is only ... sheís eight years older 
than me. So, yeah, there was some bullying a little bit, but she was so much older than me. She 
would definitely pick on me and stuff like that, but we were always really close. She just treated 
me like a big sister. 
AJ: And, protected you, Iím sure. 
TM: Super protective, she was protective ÅEyou know what Iím saying? So, yeah, it was good. 
AJ: Cool ÅEcool, cool, cool. What was school like? You went to a public school? 
TM: I went to a private school my entire life. 
AJ: Private school, really? 
TM: Private Catholic school my entire life. I went to this program ... 
AJ: A religious school? 
TM: Yeah, it was a Catholic school. St. Joeís for all of elementary school and then I went to an all-girl 
private school, Nardin Academy. 
AJ: Wow. Whatís it called? 
TM: Nardin. 
AJ: How do you spell that? 
TM: N-a-r-d-i-n. 
AJ: OK. 
The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies 
University of Minnesota TM: Nardin Academy, itís one of the top schools in New York State, all girls. There was Black girls 
in the entire school. 
AJ: What?? 
TM: Of like 600, and there was four of us in my graduating class. It was a really expensive school, but 
I went to a program called Buffalo Prep, and Qui was talking about this. We were in a program 
called Buffalo Prep that took really gifted and smart black and brown kids and put us in a 
supplementary educational program. So, 7th and 8th grade, I went to school and then on 
Tuesdays and Thursdays, I went to that school from 4-7 and then on Saturdays, I went to school 
all day from 8-3, and then over the summers, I went to school M-F as if I was in regular school to 
get us prepared for the rigorousness of ... 
AJ: College. 
TM: Yeah, for college, and to go on to these prep schools, these college prep schools. So, thatís 
where I went to school and, you know, because I was such a tomboy as a child, but then when I 
got to high school, 13-14 years old, I sprang up and people started to think I was pretty and then 
Nardin Academy was really focused on developing womanhood and femininity. And again, at 
that time, I didnít have any kind of questions around my gender identity, I just was and it was 
just like I had to put aside those masculine ways in order to make my way through those next 
four years. So, I did the feminine thing, I was a model. I did it, and I was good at it, but it wasnít 
anything that I was really invested in. 
AJ: Sure. 
TM: It wasnít anything I really loved. Now, I only took it so far. I never wore make-up, I never 
carried a purse, I wouldnít get my nails done. I was like, ìThatís too much, youíre going too far.ÅE 
But, I did it and high school was great. I played basketball all through high school, I played 
volleyball all through high school. 
AJ: Were you good? 
TM: I was very good, I was very good. Actually, I went to college with a full D1 basketball 
scholarship. 
AJ: Is that right? 
TM: I did, yes, to Niagara University. But, they were really racist ÅEthey were very, very racist and 
they kind of crushed that dream. I was really on my way to the WNBA. The WNBA debuted in 
1998, and that was when I was first entering college and everybody was like, ìYou got it, youíre 
going to get through these four years and youíre going to go pro.ÅE 
AJ: You were that good. 
TM: Yeah, I was all-city, all-state, all-high, all-American. I was third team All-American. 
AJ: Did you guys win championships and stuff when you were in high school? 
The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies 
University of Minnesota TM: Yeah, yeah. We won county championships, city championships, we made it to state 
championships and we had to play against Christ the King High School in New York City and 
thatís when Shamika Holdsclaw was playing. I was a freshman and she was a senior and that 
school, they were beating us by like points, and so I was just a freshman on the varsity team 
at the time, so I wasnít really getting any playing time. I damn sure wasnít going to play in this 
really important game. I remember, they put me in the game and we were getting beat by 
points, and they still had all their starters in the game ÅEShamika was in the game, and I had to 
guard her. She just dragged me all the way to the half-court line. And, then I ended up getting a 
full ride to Niagara University and they treated me really badly there. 
AJ: Is that right? 
TM: Treated me really badly. Like yesterday in my talk, I said I donít watch sports anymore and I 
think thatís what did it for me. 
AJ: That crushed it. 
TM: That crushed it. I havenít watched a basketball game since. 
AJ: Is that right? 
TM: Yeah, yeah ÅEitís kind of like one of those dreams deferred. 
AJ: Racism. 
TM: Yeah, racism, and it really crushed my dreams, it really did. They were really bad to me. I was 
the only Black kid on the team and then it was in the MAAC Conference, M-A-A-C, not the M-A-C 
and that conference, there werenít a lot of Black kids on any of those teams. 
AJ: Right, exactly. 
TM: It was hard. So, it wasnít just that, just coaches ... the coach treated me badly, just being on 
campus ÅEthe campus was lily white, and violent. I had bananas thrown at me and I was like, ìI 
donít have to stay here for this,ÅEand I was out. 
AJ: Oh, no, no ÅEIím out. 
TM: I said, ìI can go get an education elsewhere.ÅEAnd that was the end of my hoop dreams. 
AJ: Yeah, wow. Thatís a tough story. 
TM: Yeah, yeah. 
AJ: But, all during this time, no real thoughts around gender? 
TM: Not around gender, but around sexuality though. 
AJ: Sexuality, OK. 
TM: I came out at 14. 
AJ: Is that right? 
The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies 
University of Minnesota TM: I came out at as a lesbian. I sat my mom down ... my sister got pregnant at 15, so my 
mother was just so scared that I was going to get ... so, I sat her down and I was like, ìLook ... 
listen, Iím not pregnant, but I think Iím gay.ÅEShe didnít take it well for a minute, but she got 
over it. She got over it and she became one of my biggest supporters. So, you know, I came out 
at 14, was really in queer community, and I think back to gender, I just remember being really 
feminine and attracting a lot of masculine women, and just knowing that masculinity wasnít 
something that I was attracted to but was something that I kind of wanted. I couldnít 
understand what that was. I was like, ìI donít want your masculinity on me, but I think I want to 
embody it in a particular way.ÅE 
AJ: Yeah. 
TM: So, it started to creep in slowly. Thatís what I talk to people about ÅElike gender identity. 
AJ: So, you dated masculine women? 
TM: I didnít, I didnít like them. 
AJ: OK. 
TM: Thatís the thing, they really liked me but I was like, ìI donít like yíall. Iím not attracted to your 
masculinity in that way.ÅESo, that was when I was in high school, so when I graduated high 
school in 1998, my high school graduation was the last time I wore any feminine clothes at all. It 
was like as soon as that was over, I knew that I didnít have to do it anymore, I was becoming a 
young adult and I could just go back into a place that felt comfortable for me. And, thatís when I 
really started to develop my masculinity again and I was really only into feminine folks. But 
yeah, when I talk about gender identity and that process, it is an evolution. I know for me it was 
an evolution, it was a slow evolution. It was always there, even from the time I got that 
Strawberry Shortcake bicycle. It was always something that was there, it was a gradual thing. It 
wasnít like a moment where there was a blip, it wasnít a reaction to any kind of trauma. All the 
times people try to say that trans people are the result of some trauma, and a lot of us 
experience a lot of trauma, but that doesnít make us trans, that doesnít make us queer. And, it 
wasnít that for me, it was just really a slow evolution and then by the time I got to New York 
City, I was butch, I was king of the butches. You werenít going to tell me nothing. And, it just 
kind of evolved from there. 
AJ: Oh, wow. 
TM: Yeah, yeah, yeah. 
AJ: So, how many identities have you sort of embodied throughout your life? You came out at as 
a lesbian ... and then 18, you was butch. 
TM: First I came out and said, ìI think Iím bisexual,ÅEjust because I wasnít sexually active yet so ... 
AJ: Yeah, so it was like boys, girls ... 
TM: Yeah, so I tried both and at first, I was having sex with all these boys. I tried it and I was like, ìI 
hate this.ÅEAnd then I was like, ìWell, maybe thatís the wrong one.ÅEOK, screw it ÅEdo it again. 
The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies 
University of Minnesota Tiq Milan 
So, ìNo, I really hate this. I donít want to do it with these guys anymore.ÅEThen, I discovered 
women and, ìAhhh.ÅE 
AJ: You had an Oprah moment. 
TM: So, Iím thinking ... there was a quick moment where I was bisexual, lesbian for a long time. I 
donít think I ever identified as feminine. I donít think that that was something I would ever say, 
I think itís just what it was. Then I was being a stud, as a youngster, and then butch, and then I 
came into my trans masculinity where I am now. 
AJ: Wow, OK. 
TM: Definitely a journey across the spectrum. Yeah. 
AJ: So, you came out to your mom, she wasnít really feeling it but she came around. 
TM: She did, she came around. Yeah. 
AJ: When did you come out as trans? 
TM: I came out as trans years ago, 2007. 
AJ: OK. 
TM: Thatís when I first took my shot. Oh, you know what? Thatís not true. I started taking T in 
2007. I didnít come out until 2010, when I had to have my top surgery. I wasnít telling anybody. 
I was on T ... what I was doing, you know, when you take testosterone you take one cc every 
two weeks. But, I was really scared to do that because I was like, ìI donít know what these 
changes are going to look like, Iím not ready for my family to know,ÅEso I was doing a quarter ÅE 
like .3 of a cc every week, just so I could go really, really slow, just give me some time. And what 
I understood early on was that this transition was something everybody had to make. So, I 
didnít want to just pop up at home with a full beard, you know what I mean? 
AJ: Right, itís not like youíre just transitioning, itís everybody around you is transitioning. 
TM: Everybody does. My parents have to get used to having a son now ÅEthey had four daughters, 
and now they only got three. 
AJ: They got three, right. 
TM: You know what Iím saying? So, that was hard for me. I didnít come out and tell anybody until I 
had gotten top surgery because having major surgery and didnít want to tell my mother, but 
had to because she was a nurse, and then my mother was always my ally, my front line of 
protection. I let her tell everybody. I never told my dad I had surgery, because he didnít need to 
know that. 
AJ: Right, right. 
TM: Yeah, so I think thatís when I kind of first just came out. I had some awkward moments, some 
really awkward questions, but my mother was such an ally to me, I think, that she really was my 
buffer. She really made it known that she was not going to allow anybody to disrespect me and mistreat me, even if they didnít understand ... even if she didnít understand it. Because, she was like, ìIím not ... this is my child, weíre not playing those games.ÅE
AJ: 	Not having that. 
TM: 	Yeah, so yeah it was a gradual thing. But now, Iím completely out and ... I saw my aunt the other day and she was like, ìI donít even ... I donít even remember, youíre just such a young man now, youíre so awesome, itís like I donít even remember the person that you used to be.ÅEAnd, I guess, thatís cool but itís also the person that I used to be has a huge influence on the man that I am now. And thatís ... I think Iím really grounded in that. 
AJ: 	You know, I want to ask you this question too, because you brought it up and sort of framed it, your aunt is like, ìI donít even remember who you are.ÅEBut, in many ways, I feel like I really havenít changed that much. 
TM: 	Me neither. You still got the same brain. 
AJ: 	Iímstill... 
TM: 	The same person, right? Yeah. 
AJ: 	Right, yeah. And, Iím just wondering your take on that. 
TM: 	I feel the same way. I still think the same, I still feel the same, Iím still me. My name has changed and my pronouns changed. 
AJ: 	But you look different. 
TM: 	I look different. But, my spirit and my intellect and my mind and my integrity and the person that I am, is still the same. Itís like ... how can I look at it as an analogy. Itís like who you are at your core and your spirit is like the sun. So, say this is the sun, and then when you give who you are, this is the race of your sun to somebody else. So, say, prior to my transition, say that our body is like a stained-glass window ... so, at one point in my life, this stain glass window was orange, and so when you got all of me, it came out and these rays came out like orange, but now itís blue. So, now, youíre still getting me, but now it just looks blue. 
AJ: 	A different filter, yeah. 
TM: 	Itís just a different filter, but itís still me. 
AJ: 	Right, exactly. 
TM: 	Thatís how it feels, it hasnít changed my brain and my heart ÅEsame person, same person. 
AJ: 	Yeah, absolutely. Thank you for expounding on that a little bit. Relationship with your family now ÅEhow is it? 
TM: 	Itís great. My family is awesome. My family ... they really, like I said, we had some awkward moments and some weird conversations because, again, everybody had to transition. Shit, I had some awkward moments with myself. 
AJ: 	Yeah. 
Tiq Milan 
TM: Some awkward conversations with myself as I was transitioning. But theyíre great. I have ... 
how many? I have nieces and nephews and most of them are under ... I have four who are 
grown and the rest of them are under the age of 8, and all they know is Uncle Tiq. They call me 
Uncle Tiq Tiq. They love Uncle Tiq Tiq. Iím saying, my sisters ÅEthey love their little brother. My 
father is really happy about having this father/son thing. Heís doing that whole thing, which is 
great. My family really has been really ... and even my 90-year-old grandma, Madea, sheís 
great. 
AJ: Madea. 
TM: Yeah, Madea is awesome. 
AJ: Thatís what I call my grandma. 
TM: You call her Madea ÅEyeah. Madea knows whatís up. Madea is telling me, ìWe knew people 
like you growing up, itís nothing.ÅEIt took her a bit to get her pronouns together, sometimes 
sheíll still say, ìHey, girl ... oh, no.ÅESheíll do this, ìOh, no.ÅEIíll give her a big hug and sheíll 
apologize. 
AJ: Yeah, but sheís still grandma. 
TM: I have a huge family, a lot of extended family that I havenít seen ÅEmy dad always wants me to 
come to his family reunion and Iím like, ìMan, listen, I ainít seen these folks since I was little and 
then Iíve got to make all these explanations and I donít want you to feel awkward. So, Iím cool 
with just the folks that Iím cool with.ÅEBut people havenít skipped a beat, everybody has been 
really good. 
AJ: Thatís beautiful, thatís beautiful. 
TM: Yeah, itís been good. 
AJ: Which, as Iíve been doing these interviews, Tiq, a lot of times in white families, theyíre not 
getting that kind of reception. 
TM: I know, I know. And thereís this misconception that Black families are more homophobic and 
transphobic than white ÅEand itís not. As a matter of fact, I was reading ... there was a study 
that came out, I think it was a couple of years ago ÅEand it could have been the Anti-Violence 
Project, talking about violence against trans people, the statistics. And, it was saying statistically 
transgender people who are thrown away by their families, that donít have family support, are 
more likely to become victims of violence, are more likely to engage in sex work, and all these 
things which we already know. Right? 
AJ: Sure. 
TM: But, it also said that what they found was ... the people who were a part of the survey, most of 
the Black people that were part of the survey, actually had that family support. 
AJ: Right. Tiq Milan 
TM: And, a lot of people arenít talking about that. Now, not to say that none of us donít, because a 
lot of us donít. 
AJ: A lot of us donít. 
TM: I worked with LGBT youth for a long time and lots of trans Black youth and so many kids, were 
thrown away by their families, but I also know a lot who werenít. I was working at Harvey Milk 
High School and I had four trans girls whose parents were involved, who were there, were like, 
ìWe just want my child to be OK, keep them safe.ÅEI am not an anomaly. 
AJ: Yeah. 
TM: And, I think thatís important for people to know. 
AJ: Thatís true, thatís real. Who was the first trans person you ever met? 
TM: The first trans person I ever met ... what was his name? Oh, what was his name? This white 
trans guy ... oh, I canít remember his name. But anyway, let me tell you a story. So, when I 
moved to New York City, I moved to New York City to go to grad school. That didnít work out 
because I got caught up in the New York lifestyle. I was bartending and drinking and drugging, I 
was doing a lot. I was bartending at this lesbian bar called Meow Mix. 
AJ: What? Iíve been there. 
TM: Yeah, itís down in East Village, or lower eastside rather. And, all of a sudden, his name ... this 
trans guy, a white trans guy, came in there. I didnít know he was trans and he was handing out 
flyers for his top surgery. Now mind you, this was probably 2004 or 2005, before I had started 
any hormones or anything. I was like, ìTop surgery, what the hell is that? I never even heard of 
such ÅEwhat is that?ÅEThey was like, ìOh, heís getting his breasts removed.ÅEI was like, ìHe, 
who?ÅE 
AJ: Right ... this guy. 
TM: ìThis man with the full beard?ÅEAnd theyíre like, ìYeah, heís transgender, heís transsexual, heís 
a trans man.ÅEI had no ... I think that was the moment where I realized that it was possible. I 
remember at that time, I wasnít necessarily depressed, but I was confused. Iím in this butch 
body and this identity, but something donít feel right, something feels like itís missing. Iím not 
happy ÅEwhat is it? Iím not happy with me. And, I couldnít figure out what it was and then I saw 
him and at this time I didnít have any etiquette, I didnít know. I asked him all the wrong 
questions. What his name used to be, if he had a penis. I asked all of the wrong questions, but 
he was really gracious and he answered all of them for me. He was the first trans person that I 
ever met. And it stuck with me. I remember from that day on, I couldnít stop thinking about it, I 
couldnít stop thinking about it. I was like, ìWow.ÅE 
AJ: So, he had a significant impact? 
TM: You know, heís still my friend on Facebook. I should probably hit him up and let him know. Yup, 
yup ÅEIíll never forget that. He was the first person I met and that kind of just sparked. It 
literally was like a light bulb went off, like, ìOh, shit.ÅE AJ: Like, ìThis is a reality.ÅE 
TM: This is a reality, this could be my reality. I could do this, I could be a man. And I said, ìWow, do I really want to be a man?ÅEIím going back and forth ... so, I went back and forth for a few years. That happened in 2004 and like I said I didnít take my first shot until 2007. I really was taking that time to figure out what is this and is this something that I want to do? But he was the first person that I met. 
AJ: So, Tiq, let me ask you this, and please answer this question to the extent that you want to, and if you donít want to answer it, thatís cool too. 
TM: Sure. 
AJ: But, youíve already talked about it a little bit, but Iím just curious what medical interventions, if any, have you undertaken in your gender journey? 
TM: Yeah. Iím on T. Iíve been on T now for years and Iíve had top surgery, a double mastectomy and chest reconstruction. 
AJ: Sure. 
TM: And, the other surgery I want to have is I want to have a hysterectomy. I was trying to get it last year ... I was trying to get it last year and I got denied. I wasnít trans enough. First, let me tell you, I went to a medical clinic in New York City where they have a trans ... 
AJ: They didnít ... youíre a man. I would think that they would ... 
TM: The insurance denied me. Even after my doctor was like, ìTiq has been under my care for almost years, heís been on T since 2007, he lives his life as a man 100%.ÅEAnd they still denied me. And the messed-up part about it was that I went to a trans-specific clinic at a hospital. I donít want to name any names, but a hospital in New York City. It felt really bad because I had to sit in front of these two white cis men and have this conversation to prove to them that Iím trans enough to get this surgery. 
AJ: Right. 
TM: And the doctor was asking me really inappropriate questions. He asked me how big my breasts were before I had surgery. 
AJ: What? Why does that matter? 
TM: I told him, ìWhy does that even matter?ÅEI told him I went to an all-girls school and he asked me if I had to wear like a little plaid skirt and I was like, ìDude?ÅE 
AJ: Get the fuck out of here. 
TM: He was really, really inappropriate. I think I ended up getting him fired ... good for him. 
AJ: Wow. 
TM: I complained to everybody about it, because I donít play that shit. Itís like ... itís me, 37-years≠old, a leader in the community who does this work, who is really well versed in this work. Itís Tiq Milan 
one thing for you to do that to me, but what happens to a young kid who comes here who 
doesnít have the same level of confidence that I do. 
AJ: Exactly. 
TM: Or, it doesnít have to be a young person ÅEany person who is there who doesnít have the same 
support or confidence or platform that I do and you ask these really abusive questions, you 
could really fuck somebody up. Can I curse? 
AJ: Itís your video. 
TM: You can really fuck somebody up, so I made it a point to let everybody know what happened. 
So, I was trying to get my hysto last year and it got denied. The thing about me getting a 
hysterectomy, honestly, the only reason I wanted to get it is because my mother died of cancer, 
my grandmother died of cancer, and my aunt died of cancer. Cancer runs in my family. 
AJ: There is a medical history ... 
TM: Of cancer in my family. 
AJ: Yeah. 
TM: And, thereís not a lot of information about what the long-term effects of being on a synthetic 
hormone has on your body, particularly on your reproductive system that youíre not using. 
Right? So, I donít get a cycle anymore, my reproductive organs are atrophied, theyíre not doing 
what they were made to do. So, like take it all out. If I didnít have a reason to be worried about 
cancer and things like that, I wouldnít care. 
AJ: Right. 
TM: I wouldnít care. So, for me, it wasnít even about having this surgery as a gender-affirming 
surgery, it was medical. If I wasnít transgender, I would have had it. 
AJ: You would have had it ÅEyeah. 
TM: That just speaks volumes about how weíre not given adequate care because weíre trans. I was 
trying to tell them, ìI know Iím doing this trans-specific thing, but this has ... me getting a 
hysterectomy has nothing to do with me being trans, this is about my overall health and me 
wanting my longevity because I have a history of cancer in my family.ÅESo, that was really 
messed up, so Iím going to try again this year to get it ÅEor next year. 
AJ: How did they justify denying it? 
TM: You know, I donít even remember. I still have the letter ... if I had my bag I could show it to 
you, I have it in my bag. But, yeah, they sent me ... my insurance sent me a letter saying that 
they were denying me coverage and that they didnít think that it was necessary for me to get it 
ÅEthat it was necessary for my identity. I was like, ìItís not for my identity, this is for my body. 
Iím a trans person and I have other medical needs outside of my transition specifically.ÅE 
AJ: Yeah, thatís like Angelina Jolie. She ... Tiq Milan 
TM: Got her breasts removed. 
AJ: ... got the breasts removed because of a history of cancer in her family. 
TM: Yeah, and actually thatís how I was able to get mine done because, at the time, in 2010, when I 
got my surgery done, a lot of people werenít getting it covered and the doctor ... itís wild, itís 
two women doctors who are just allies to trans people and they were kind of doing it on the 
low, and what they did ÅEthe one doctor, she had a group of trans guys come in and she did like 
a group thing. She was like, ìIím doing these surgeries for these folks, I feel like you need it, but 
this is what you do ÅEstay female on your insurance.ÅEI explained that I have a history of breast 
cancer in my family and showed them my documentation, I had to go get certain tests done, and 
then I was able to get that done as a preventative measure for cancer. 
AJ: Right. 
TM: So, that was how I was able to get my surgery covered. And then the next one I really wanted to 
get it for those reasons. So, they didnít do it. So, thatís the only surgery stuff Iíve had is top 
surgery and Iím on T. I want to get my hysto as soon as possible, and Iím not electing to get 
bottom surgery. Itís just not that deep for me. I can sit and pee, thatís totally fine. 
AJ: Oh, man. Thank you for sharing that. 
TM: Yeah, yeah, yeah. 
AJ: Talk to me about love and relationships. 
TM: Love and relationships. 
AJ: Has being trans made it a problem? 
TM: You know ... 
AJ: You are an extremely handsome young man. 
TM: Thank you, thank you. 
AJ: I canít imagine you having problems dating, but I am trans identified myself and ... 
TM: It can be hard. 
AJ: It can be hard. 
TM: You know, honestly, yeah, Iím married right now, which is great. 
AJ: Congratulations. 
TM: Thank you. Iíve been married almost four years. My wife is cis gender, queer identified ÅEgreat. 
Weíve got a baby coming. 
AJ: And, you guys are expecting. 
TM: Two more months. Tiq Milan 
AJ: Congratulations! 
TM: My babyís going to be here in two months. My wife is seven months pregnant, which is 
awesome. So, love and relationships ... for me, itís been OK, I think, because Iíve been in queer 
community since I was a kid. I came out when I was 14, so weíre talking years. I was raised 
in queer community. They brought me up, I was brought up by a bunch of drag queens and 
butches and femmes. These people raised me. Iíve always been in community, and particularly 
community in New York City where I spent all of my 20s. People watched me grow, so I think ... 
I just had a community I could call on, particularly in lesbian community. When I transitioned, I 
really did lose ... I did lose connection to the lesbian community. 
AJ: You did? 
TM: I did. And, I think, rightfully so. I think itís important for women, whether they are cis or trans, 
whether they are gay or straight, to have exclusive spaces. Iím a man now. Not only am I a 
man, but Iím a binary man, a masculine man. I didnít think it was right for me to be up in the 
girlís clubs. I donít think thatís my space anymore. So, there was a period of loneliness and then 
I think my first relationship ... I was really into my trans identity and I was with this woman, 
while I had my top surgery I was with her, when I changed my name. She was lesbian identified 
and she loved me, but she was a lesbian and we broke up. She was like, ìI love you but ...ÅE 
AJ: ìI ainít really feeling guys.ÅE 
TM: She was like, ìIím a lesbian, I donít think I can do this.ÅE 
AJ: Right. 
TM: That was hard, that was really, really hard. It was really, really hard and I called my mother 
crying. My mother cried, she was heartbroken for me. I think that was her biggest concern was 
who was going to love my child. She was like, ìYouíre such an amazing person, is it going to be 
too much of this for the lesbians and youíre not enough of this for the straight girls.ÅE But then, 
we started queer people and queerness, and so thereís space here. 
AJ: Yeah. 
TM: So, yeah, it was hard for a minute, but what I did was ... I really just committed myself to 
saying, ìIím not ... first of all, Iím not going to pursue anybody that donít want me. Iím not out 
here ... Iím not straight.ÅEI always like to tell people, ìI know I may look cis gender or I may look 
straight, but I am not. I do not want to be straight.ÅE Because straight ... I think itís more than a 
sexuality, itís also a culture. I like queer culture, these are my people. This is my community, 
these are my people. Iím trans and Iím proud to be trans and I only want to deal with women 
who will understand that. I only want to deal with women who are queer identified and who 
can say specifically, ìI am queer and I am attracted to transgender people. I am attracted to 
trans men, Iím just not ... I am not in this to be anybodyís experiment, Iím not in this to be 
doing Trans 101, I do that for a living, I donít want to do that at home.ÅE 
AJ: Right, yeah. TM: So, once I really placed those boundaries around myself and said these are the kind of standards that I have, and really started to focus inward on me being my best self, then I noticed that the type of people who I wanted were coming into my circle. 
AJ: So, things started opening up. 
TM: Opening up. Thereís this book called Calling in the One, which is really great. It talks about 
AJ: Calling in ... 
TM: Calling in the One. And itís really about finding love in your life, a big part of that is you finding love within yourself first. Get grounded in who you are, set you some standards ÅElike this is what I want from my life, I am ready for these type of people to come in and then start it happening. You know, so I dated lots of girls here and there, and then Iíve been with my wife now for four years. So, itís been good. Itís been good ÅEbut, itís scary. The times that I have ... Iím a serial monogamous, I stay booíd up. But, the times that I have been single as a trans person, has been kind of scary. I remember I did some online dating. I met a couple girls online at one point and they were ... Iíd tell them I was trans and then crickets. 
AJ: Right. 
TM: They would just disappear. I thought, ìOK.ÅEThey were like, ìYou are what? Good night.ÅEBut I was like, ìOK, itís cool, itís cool. Let me stay in my community, let me meet people here.ÅESo, itís been all right, itís been all right. But, itís really because I am really grounded in queer community and this is where I create family, this is where I create love, and itís been good. 
AJ: Yeah, you alluded to this a couple of times but you were here in Minneapolis ... 
TM: Two years ago. 
AJ: Ahh, two years ago. What did you do then? 
TM: It was cold. It was January, 2015, and I was up here ... or was it three years ago. When did ... this was to do a media training with CeCe. 
AJ: OK. 
TM: So, CeCe ... 
AJ: CeCeís been out for almost three years now. 
TM: OK, so this was 2014 then, because my mother was still alive and my mother died that year, that summer ... my mom was alive then. So, yeah, the last I was here was January, 2014, and it was to do a media training with CeCe McDonald, because this was around the time that her film was coming out. That was great, I met some good people. I didnít go nowhere, I stayed in the hotel. 
AJ: I know, thatís ... 
TM: And, I ordered some food ÅEfreezing. 
AJ: Yeah, it was pretty cold. So, youíre here this time to be a keynote speaker at the University of Minnesota. Tiq Milan 
TM: Yes, I was invited to come again this year to give a talk for your Power & Privilege series. 
AJ: Right. 
TM: Which is really great. There was a nice turnout, it was a good talk, I had a good time yesterday. 
One thing about ... I mean, I made fun of Minnesota because itís so cold, Minneapolis because 
itís so cold, but the people here are really nice. And even though I was here a few years ago, 
everybody was so nice and people seemed to be really open and open-hearted and open≠ 
minded. 
AJ: What did you talk about? 
TM: My talk the other day? 
AJ: Yeah. 
TM: So, the talk I gave was called, ìRedefining Masculinity.ÅEAnd, itís about my journey across 
gender, but itís also about the process of creating an organic masculinity. As Iíve been on this 
journey, what Iíve realized about masculinity is that I think itís ... particularly cis gender or 
heterosexuality masculinity, which is always, what was always before I admitted it, was where I 
was looking to get my ques on masculinity. It felt like it was repressed, it was kind of sad, kind 
of sociopathic in various ways ÅEyou know what Iím saying? And, so I really had to scrap that, ìI 
donít want to be like yíall, I donít want to be a man like you. I need to figure out how to be a 
man like me.ÅEWhat does it look like for me to be a binary masculine queer identified Black 
trans man whoís not an asshole? What does that look like? So, thatís what I talked about 
yesterday, what that journey has been for me. And itís been something thatís been really 
intentional and really deliberate. So, I want to ... Iíve been in queer spaces, particularly white 
queer spaces, where people have felt like my presence as a Black masculine man, you know Iím 
six feet tall and Iím masculine in various ways, I wasnít queer enough. And, itís like Iím not going 
to play down my masculinity or play up a feminine energy that doesnít feel natural to me to 
make you feel comfortable. So, what does that look like? How can I be in my skin and then my 
masculinity? And, Iím not about making other people feel comfortable, but itís just about ... 
just being my authentic self. 
AJ: Being authentic. 
TM: And doing something thatís organic. Like, creating masculinity that is not reactionary, creating 
masculinity thatís coming from my spirit, thatís tethered to who I am in a very deep, deep way. 
So, thatís what I was talking about yesterday. 
AJ: I really appreciated your talk and it highlighted a lot of issues. I really appreciated the section on 
street harassment that cis gender and trans women face on a daily basis and how that impacts 
peopleís psyches and yeah, the whole section about every guy feels like itís his right, but then 
multiply that times 80 guys a day. 
TM: It drives women crazy and we wonder why they snap. My wife comes home having an attitude, 
sheís like, ìYo, dudes just tried to talk to me in two blocks.ÅE 
AJ: Right. Tiq Milan 
TM: ìIím just trying to go to the grocery store. Leave me the fuck alone.ÅE 
AJ: Exactly. 
TM: Thatís what Iím saying ÅEcis men are just such a disappointment. Itís like, ìWhy are you doing 
this? Why are you ...?ÅEIf you want to get into this whole heterosexist idea about you want to 
be the head of the household, the head of the family, leaders of the free world, but you canít 
control yourself, my brother? You talk about women and femme people who we are supposed 
to protect, youíre supposed to love, but youíre going to tear her down because she doesnít 
want you? Thereís this level of entitlement around masculinity, I think, thatís just sick and itís 
not allowing women the freedom to be their own autonomous selves. 
AJ: Yeah. 
TM: And not making space to having really valuable friendships with women, I think, is just a 
detriment to their own humanity. So, I definitely donít want to be like these guys. 
AJ: Tiq, have you ever worked for or volunteered with any LGBT organizations before? 
TM: Oh, yeah. I think Iíve probably worked at every major LGBT organization in New York. Let me 
see, I worked at Lambda Legal, I worked at GLAAD, I worked at the Hetrick-Martin Institute, I 
worked at the Bronx Community Pride Center, Iím on the board for the National Anti-Violence 
Project, Iíve done some work with GLSEN. Iíve done it all. 
AJ: Wow, OK. 
TM: Iíve really honed my skills in the non-profit world. 
AJ: Youíre a media communications writer, consultant. 
TM: Yeah, yeah ÅEmedia communications consultant, strategic media consultant, journalist, I can be 
all of that stuff. 
AJ: What publications have your written for? 
TM: Iíve written for Buzz Feed, the Guardian, New York Times, CNN.com, Iíve done some work for 
MTV, Rolling Stone, Source Magazine, Vibe Magazine, Quartz.com ... who else? Huffington 
Post ... yeah, all of them. 
AJ: All of them. 
TM: Yeah, itís a hustle. Iím a freelancer. Iím pitching stories everywhere, ìWho wants me to write? 
Hereís an idea ÅEpay me.ÅE 
AJ: And now youíre working on your memoir. 
TM: Iím working on my memoir, which is Man of My Design: A Self-Determined Life. And, the 
memoir is my journey. 
AJ: Man of My Design. Tiq Milan 
TM: Man of My Design: A Self-Determined Life. And, itís my story of my journey through gender, but 
itís also the process of coming into my most authentic self. For the book ... I donít want people 
to read my book and think that this is something thatís just for trans folks. I definitely want it to 
be for my people, but I also want cis gender folks and straight folks to be able to look at this 
book and be able to see my journey as a trans person and our journey as trans people as a 
model of possibility to become your best self. Because thatís what we have done, weíve made 
all kinds of sacrifices, weíve done what people think is impossible ÅEto live in our truth. 
AJ: Weíve done what we thought was impossible. 
TM: Exactly, exactly ÅEwe sure did. Look at us. Anything is possible. If you can see it in your mind, 
you can hold it in your hand. I saw the man that I wanted to be right here and I brought it into 
fruition, so I can do anything ÅEand so can you. I think that that journey is important, and I think 
that that journey is important for everybody. 
AJ: Yeah. Do you have a publisher? Do you have a book deal? 
TM: I donít. I have an agent, I have a literary agent, I got my book proposal in and Iím sure sheís got 
some edits for me. So, Iím going to edit this out and weíre going to look out for some 
publishers. But, I have some friends at some publishing ... 
AJ: So, your first manuscript is done? 
TM: No, no, no ÅEthe manuscript isnít done, the proposal is done. 
AJ: The proposal is done. 
TM: Right now, I have an outline of about chapters, but I only have five written. So, I have five 
chapters written, Iím still outlining and working on the rest. But, I have five complete chapters 
done and the book proposal ... the book proposal is like 70 pages. 
AJ: Yeah, wow. 
TM: Because youíve got to do the overview and then youíve got to do the chapter outline and then 
the breakdown and then the sample chapters and the marketing thing and the comparative and 
competitive titles. Itís a lot. So, Iíve got all of that done and Iím waiting for that to come back 
and while thatís happening, Iím just busting out these chapters ÅEwriting and writing and 
writing. So, Iím hoping to have the manuscript done within three months, I think I can get it 
done in three months. But then, itís just a matter of once you get the manuscript done, then 
youíve got to get it back and probably do it all over again ÅEyou know, youíve got to do the edits. 
So, like I said, my agent has it ... 
AJ: Yeah, people think writing a book is easy, man. 
TM: Writing a book is torture, itís hell. Itís awful ... itís awful, itís awful. Thereís nothing easy about 
it. But, anything easy ainít really worth having. So, Iím up for the challenge. So, I think itís going 
to be a good book and I think Iím going to find a publisher, I think thereís a space for it. 
AJ: Right. Tiq Milan 
TM: I honestly think thereís a space for it. 
AJ: Thereís not ... well, thereís certainly not enough Black trans stories that are able to transition 
or ... transcend is the word Iím looking for, trans identity. Right? 
TM: Yeah, yeah. And, thatís my goal. 
AJ: And thatís your goal, to be more of a human-interest story for all humans. 
TM: For all human beings, yeah ÅEthatís what I want. And then, I already have a second book in mind 
... write that, and then the second book I want to be more like talking ... taking that idea of 
self-actualization and expanding on it. Like something like a self-help kind of situation. 
AJ: Well, Iíll be glad when you write this book about organic ... 
TM: Organic masculinity. 
AJ: ... masculinity. 
TM: Yeah. 
AJ: Because, man, we need that. 
TM: We need that, we need that. 
AJ: We really need that. 
TM: We really do, because men are out here showing their asses. 
AJ: Wow. Where do you see the trans community ... no, let me ask you this question, because 
youíve worked with damn near every LGBT organization in New York City. 
TM: All the majors, yeah. I sure have. 
AJ: What is the relationship between the L, the G, the B and the T? 
TM: You know, I think itís getting better. I do think itís getting better. I do remember a time where 
it was just gay and lesbian and people werenít even checking for trans folks. And, the only 
reason itís getting better is because of us. Itís always the most marginalized folks that have to 
bring the privileged folks kicking and screaming to a place where you understand our humanity. 
And, weíve done that and these larger organizations that Iíve been a part of, I have seen a shift 
in their focus. A large part of the reason the shift in the focus is happening is because marriage 
equality already took off. Marriage equality took off, all the resources were pooled into that, we 
have that so whatís the next thing? Trans people. So, I see that happening, which I think is 
great on an organizational level, itís not perfect. I think the non-profit model itself is flawed in 
many ways. But, I see it getting better. Trans people, we are taking up a lot of space. There are 
people like you and myself and people who have really been the voices of trans people who 
have been really unapologetic in our transness and in our journey and just really saying ... we 
are demanding that you see us and that you pay attention to us. And, itís happening and itís so 
great to have trans people out here in pop culture. Weíve got Laverne out here doing her thing Tiq Milan 
and Brian Michael Smith who just came out. Heís been acting for years and no one knew he was 
trans until recently when he had a trans character on Queen Sugar. So, heís out. 
AJ: Who is this? 
TM: His name is Brian Michael Smith. He was on ... have you ever seen Queen Sugar? 
AJ: I have only seen one episode. 
TM: Me too. I wonít lie, me too, and itís such an amazing show. But anyway, I had read for this part 
... but anyway, Brian Michael Smith is a Black trans guy. Heís been on Law and Order, heís 
been on a bunch of commercials, he was on Chicago PD, and no one knew he was trans. The 
only person that knew he was trans ... 
AJ: Iíve seen a lot of Chicago PD. 
TM: Yeah, he was just on there. No one knew he was trans and then a character came up on Queen 
Sugar for a Black trans man character. He used that character to come out. So, now heís out 
and since then heís really been taking off. Heís got a bunch of new things happening. Iím seeing 
lots of trans folks on TV. And, the more people start to see our narratives in pop culture, while 
thatís happening in tandem with us still doing this work with advocacy and legislatively and 
grass roots stuff, when these things kind of come together, weíre going to see ... I think that 
weíre going to see a cultural shift toward something that is going to be more inclusive for trans 
people. 
AJ: Thereís a little backlash going on right now. 
TM: Yeah, yeah, thereís backlash, but thatís the thing. The backlash is going to come ÅEthatís how 
the pendulum swings. We have all this visibility, all this visibility, itís going to swing back to this 
backlash ÅEitís going to happen. And then, eventually, itís just going to do this. I just saw 
another Black trans woman was murdered in Georgia ÅEa 25-year-old girl named Candace. They 
found her body today, she had been dead for three days. Twenty-fifth trans woman to be 
murdered this year. 
AJ: Rest in peace, my sister. 
TM: Rest in peace ÅEand thatís happening, and thatís going to happen, weíre still going to have to 
continue to fight. But, I think things are going to get better, I really do believe that. 
AJ: Wow. 
TM: Yeah. 
AJ: Where do you see the trans community years from now? 
TM: Whoo, years from now? I wonder if Iíll still be around ... just hobbling around in my old age. 
I think years from now, I think that if we keep doing the work that weíre doing and on the 
trajectory that we are going, I think that we are going to create a real solid space for us and not . 
. . I think we are going to be the ones that are going to bust open this idea of a gender binary. I 
think we going to be the ones that are going to say, ìYou know what? The gender binary Tiq Milan 
actually is a myth and thereís a spectrum, thereís a kaleidoscope of genders, and we are going 
to make sure that you see that.ÅE Iím hoping that we have another name. Like I was saying 
yesterday in my talk, transness is a qualifier to gender because we have no name. I think weíre 
going to name ourselves in the next years. Weíre talking two and a half generations, weíre 
going to name ourselves and weíre going to cement our place here. I think ... I really think that 
in years youíre going to have trans people, youíre going to have fucking cyborgs and shit. I 
think that there is going to be a place here because humanity is going to get more and more 
complicated as we careen into the future and particularly with this merger with people and 
technology. Weíre going to have our place. 
AJ: Wow. 
TM: Absolutely. 
AJ: I love it. 
TM: Yeah. 
AJ: Tiq, this has been an amazing hour, thank you so much. 
TM: Yeah, this is so much fun. This is a lot of fun. 
AJ: Is there anything that you want to share that I didnít have the insight or the foresight or the 
wisdom to ask. 
TM: No, I think we really ... I think we really hit all of it. I guess moving forward we should ground 
ourselves in the fact that even though we are trans people and weíve dealt with a lot of hurt and 
trauma and sacrifice, that cannot be the crux of how we define ourselves. We are not just our 
resilience to get over trauma, we are not just our strength to see it through. We are brilliant, we 
are ancient, we are the future, we should be celebrated, we should be looked at as models of 
possibility. We are more than our struggles. I think itís important for people to know that 
diversity and inclusion is the seed of innovation and thatís why weíre so dope, because we are 
diversity and inclusion. We are, I think, the future. 
AJ: The living embodiment of it, right? 
TM: We are the living embodiment of it. The way that we create space for people, the way we love. I 
know people ... and, we were talking about this earlier, about how you met so many people ÅE 
like 75 different gender identities. 
AJ: Right, exactly ÅEyes. 
TM: And thatís just like ... everybody is just like, yeah. You like it, I love it ÅEcome on, who are you? 
Who do you love? What do you want to look like? How do you represent yourself? Thatís the 
future and I think we have to ground ourselves in that ÅEwho we are. We are given blueprints to 
what a future of diversity and inclusion and love is supposed to look like and we are of 
abundance and weíre not scarce. 
AJ: Wow. Tiq Milan 
TM: And, we should expect people to look at us for leadership. 
AJ: Yeah. Yíall canít see this but Iím giving Tiq a standing ovation right now. Yeah, yeah, yeah. 
Thank you so much. 
TM: Thank you, this was awesome. 
AJ: Itís been a pleasure and until we meet again, my friend. 
TM: Until we meet again, yes. 
AJ: Peace. 
TM: Yes. 