Tamlyn Murray 
Narrator 
Andrea Jenkins 
Interviewer 
Andrea Jenkins -AJ 
Tamlyn Murray -TM 
AJ: So, hello. My name is Andrea Jenkins and I am the oral historian for the Transgender Oral History Project at the Tretter Collection at the University of Minnesota Libraries. Today is December 27, 2016. We’re actually on campus here at the University of Minnesota, and I am here today with Tamlyn Murray. How are you, Tamlyn? 
TM: I’m feeling very well. 
AJ: Yeah, good. I’m glad to see you today. Can we start out with you just stating your name, spell your name so we make sure we have the correct spelling? 
TM: Sure. 
AJ: And tell me what is your gender identity today, as you claim it, and what was your identity assigned at birth, and the pronouns that you use? 
TM: My name is Tamlyn Murray. It’s not my legal name but that’s going to change. T-a-m-l-y-n. The last name is Murray, M-u-r-r-a-y. Let’s see, the next question was? 
AJ: Your gender ... 
TM: Assigned at birth? 
AJ: Well, your gender assigned at birth and also your gender today. 
TM: Oh, female but gender non-conforming. 
AJ: OK. 
TM: So we can talk more about that if you’d like. 
AJ: Yeah, I would love to. So gender non-conforming female. And what was your gender assigned at birth? 
TM: Male. 
AJ: And you said you use ...? 
TM: She/her pronouns. 
AJ: She and her pronouns. 
TM: Right. 
AJ: Wow, that’s cool. Tamlyn, one of the questions I use to just try to get our mind in sort of a reminiscent kind of frame is tell me the first thing you remember in life. What’s your first memory? 
TM: My very first memory was being in a tent and somebody opening up the tent and there was a lot of bright sunlight coming in. It was very warm and this very pleasant smell coming in and my mom’s face. She was saying something to me and I was repeating it and she was laughing and she kept saying it, and I was repeating it and she would laugh again. So I thought that we were playing and the way I had it explained to me was we were in Miami and she was trying to teach me how to say Miami. I kept saying, “Your-ami.” And she said no, “It’s Miami,” and I would say, “Your-ami.” 
AJ: Funny. 
TM: So I don’t know how old I was back then. 
AJ: Yeah. So this was a family vacation? 
TM: Yeah, we were visiting cousins back then. 
AJ: Where did you grow up? 
TM: I grew up in Centerville, which is kind of a town about minutes north of St. Paul. 
AJ: So it’s in Minnesota? 
TM: It is in Minnesota. 
AJ: Centerville, Minnesota. I’m not sure if I’ve even ever heard of that town. What’s it like? 
TM: It’s near Hugo, Circle Pines, Forest Lake. It’s kind of a country town – a lot of farms, a couple of bars downtown, and they’re building strip malls now. 
AJ: Wow. 
TM: But I don’t spend ... if I do leave the house, I don’t spend a lot of time there. But my goal, since coming out, is to branch out and to move closer to my community. 
AJ: And your community being ...? 
TM: The trans community, which seems to be located in the Twin Cities – Minneapolis area. 
AJ: Yeah, there’s a preponderance I think – at least in the region anyway. But I’ve been doing this project, Tamlyn, and I can tell you that there are transgender people pretty much everywhere in this state and all around the country. But I can certainly understand that there may not be the kinds of resources available in the small towns across America and throughout the state of Minnesota. What kind of resources are there in Centerville for trans-identified people? 
TM: Zero. 
AJ: Zero. 
TM: Yeah, active antagonism. 
AJ: Hmmm. So it’s pretty ... hostile to trans identity. 
TM: It’s pretty redneck – yeah. 
AJ: You used the term redneck. What was growing up like in Centerville? 
TM: I kept to myself. I stayed away from typical boy-related activities. Some people throw themselves into some ... AMAB people throw themselves into the male role and embrace it as a way to ... I never understood that so I can’t really explain it. I, being a really shy person and being uncomfortable in public – at least like in crowds and that sort of thing, just became a hermit. 
AJ: So even going to grade school and high school, you were pretty much a loner? 
TM: Well, no – that’s the interesting thing is I’m very creative and so I’m a writer and I was a painter and an artist in grade school and so I did a lot of that, and I was also in theatre. 
AJ: Oh wow. 
TM: Wrote a lot of poetry, so I was reciting poetry as well. I can get up in front of people, but as long as I have a role to play and I’m actively engaged with people, then I’m fine. But if I’m part of a crowd and I’m just expected to be myself, it’s very difficult for me. Now that has changed since coming out. 
AJ: Really? 
TM: Yes. 
AJ: How so? 
TM: I don’t feel that anxiety quite as much. There’s a lot of other anxiety but the anxiety that I place on myself for being me is lessened quite a bit because I now realize that that sense of otherness was a result of gender dysphoria. I just didn’t have a way of expressing it. A lot of people say from birth that I knew I was a girl and ... 
AJ: Or a boy. 
TM: Or a boy. I just knew that I wasn’t a boy, I didn’t know that I was a girl. I just knew that I didn’t fit the gender role and I wasn’t going to play it. I didn’t want to be socialized that way. But I didn’t have any words for it until recently. I started reading things and researching and came to find out that I’m trans and then my life just flipped upside down – for the better. So here I am. 
AJ: Wow. What was your family life like in Centerville? Did you have both parents around? Siblings? 
TM: My family life was good. Both my parents are alive and I do have siblings – I have two younger sisters and two younger brothers. 
AJ: Were they ... you said you just came out or, I don’t know, you’ve come out more recently in your life. Was there any evidence of your gender confusion, maybe? You said you knew that you were not a boy, but you didn’t know exactly what you were. 
TM: Right. Well they’ve suspected I was gay for a long time. 
AJ: Were you harassed at all about that? 
TM: Harassed? No. 
AJ: Teased? 
TM: Not by my family, no. 
AJ: Not by your family – that’s good. 
TM: No. And I lifted weights in school just as a way ... and I took tae kwon do, just as a way to keep those folks away – because I was harassed for a while in grade school and middle school. That stopped happening after I learned how to take care of myself. 
AJ: Do you think a part of that ... at school, was a part of that related to your sort of gender expression? 
TM: Yeah, definitely. People who are more fluid in their gender expression, or more free or who don’t conform to societal norms, are more susceptible to violence, more susceptible to sexual predation and bullying. 
AJ: Wow. When was the first time you realized that you were not a boy? 
TM: I don’t know, maybe the fourth or fifth time I tried on my mom’s underwear. Aside from ... they were just really, really huge and I wished I had a pair of my own. But then I thought well I can’t ask my mom my own pair because there’s an obvious boundary there. Yeah, I had been corrected, shall we say ... it had been reinforced ... people who are assigned male at birth are policed into conforming to that male role. I am very sensitive to those methods, especially as a kid I was. I knew that that was what was going to happen. I just didn’t do that, didn’t bother with it. But yeah, that was about it. 
AJ: About how old were you at that point, do you think? 
TM: We were still living in Brooklyn Center, before we moved to Centerville, so probably about four or five. 
AJ: When did you first realize you were trans? 
TM: I came out to myself last year. 
AJ: 2016 or 2015? 
TM: 2015. 
AJ: OK. 
TM: I was on Tumblr and ... at first I came out as non-binary because that seemed to be the closest because I ... the term woman didn’t resonate with me, there was a lot of societal implications with the word woman and I’m still learning to own that. So for a while I was non-binary and then I changed my name publicly to something else from what my dead name is. But being non-binary didn’t quite fit and I felt that there was something else and so I tried some different pronouns and then I tried she pronouns, and that felt right. So I explored that and here I am. But going full binary didn’t feel right either, I don’t feel like being completely femme is right for me either. So it puts me in kind of an odd situation because I don’t completely fit in with the transgender narrative, at least as it was forwarded by the medical community some years ago – the one that so many transgender people were forced to assimilate with in order to get their medications and to be accepted by the trans community at large. 
AJ: What is that narrative? 
TM: That you have to be essentially seen as a gay male who wants to be a woman and that you have to be a former cross dresser, that you have to have transitioned fully – meaning living as a woman for this period of time and on hormones. That narrative has stuck and it’s very prevalent yet in the trans community, even though those medical standards have gone by the wayside a lot of the trans timelines that are on the internet still follow that narrative. 
AJ: Yeah. 
TM: So, the people who are transitioning now who go online for resources are ... first you go for this, you start cross dressing and then you might do this, and then you might go for laser hair removal if you’ve got the funds for it. That’s another part of the narrative is having money and privilege as well, is not everybody conforms to that standard narrative, not everybody has access to health care. 
AJ: Trans-specific health care you’re referring to. 
TM: Right. 
AJ: Well, all health care but ... 
TM: All health care, but trans people in particular. I’ve got a few stories ... most trans folks who have been in the health care system have stories of being denied health care or being given the runaround. 
AJ: What about you? Have you experienced that when trying to access health care? 
TM: Oh yeah. I can give you an example. 
AJ: Yes, please. 
TM: Well – and this person recently called me back to further embellish her story. I have been going to a local clinic for bariatric weight loss. My insurance company approved the treatments and I just have to be OK’d through this clinic’s certification process so I have to see a nurse and a doctor and a therapist. 
AJ: Sure. 
TM: So the nurse and the doctor were great, they used my pronouns, they addressed me as she. The therapist dead named me, referred to me in the third person ... 
AJ: Not it. 
TM: No, as Tom, which is my dead name. “Tom is this,” or, “Tom will that.” 
AJ: Wow. 
TM: As if I wasn’t in the room. And, then she asked, “So do you feel like a woman in a man’s body?” Just out of nowhere, and this is an interview for bariatric surgery. 
AJ: Right. 
TM: And I just looked at her and I said, “You know, that’s an odd question for bariatric surgery and that’s kind of an old-fashioned notion – that’s not usually how it’s described in the literature. Gender dysphoria is this, this, and this.” In the back of my head I’m thinking, “You’re a trained clinician, you should know this stuff.” 
AJ: Right. 
TM: And she’s in her early 30s. 
AJ: So fresh out of school. 
TM: Yeah. So anyway, I think OK – it’s a mental slip-up, she’s curious, she’s got a trans person in front of her, just dying to ask the question, it happens. So I just want to get the interview over because she’s the last person, the last link in the chain, and I have a disability and I need to prove to her that I meet the criteria and that I’m not cuckoo and that she can’t find fault in my behavior or my being transgender in order to get this bariatric surgery. Well, she asked me another invasive question – she says, “So do you plan on getting corrective surgery?” Again, just out of the blue. And I said, “You know, that’s a really inappropriate question.” And I said it with a straight face and tried to say it in a very forthright manner, but at the same time I was starting to get mad because in the back of my head I’m thinking, “This is gatekeeping, something is going on here – why is she asking me these questions?” Because she had ... somehow, she was asking me about the sexual abuse that I had experienced as a kid at the same time, and how she had gotten a hold of those records, I have no idea. So she’s asking about sex abuse, she’s asking about my being transgender and I’m wondering, “Is she equating these two?” A lot of anti-trans people do. So I tell her, “That’s a really inappropriate question.” And she said, “I’m very sorry, this is a quick interview and forgive me for asking an insensitive question. I just want to get through this interview.” And so forth. 
AJ: Which was, again, insensitive. 
TM: Yeah. And so I’m being a really meek and ... I just didn’t know what to say, I didn’t know what to do. She’s got the power in the situation and if I act out, if I act like a crazy trans person ... 
AJ: Yeah, you don’t get your surgery. 
TM: Then I don’t get my surgery – exactly. So I just let it slide and a couple days later I get a call saying, “I’m sorry, but you’re not right for surgery because you haven’t been mentally stable for X amount of time.” 
AJ: So they denied you? 
TM: Yeah, they denied me. So I complained to their patient relations department and just gave them a very detailed but objective blow-by-blow of what happened and tried to be as detail oriented, and left out all of the emotional aspects. I talked it over with my therapist and tried to weed out all of my emotional colorations of what had happened of the event. I thought I was being very rational about it. And then I also went to my general practitioner and said, “Can we please take a look at these notes by this therapist?” And so he opened up the notes and she had gone through and wrote up psychotic and unstable and all of this other stuff, and I read the notes on the screen. 
AJ: Wow. 
TM: So, she’s clearly gatekeeping. I don’t know what is going on there. 
AJ: And all of this was related to your gender identity, you believe? 
TM: She was fixated on my being trans. Yeah, I am certified disabled through the federal government and through the state, but my disability is well controlled through meds and therapy. So, the common place narrative of the crazy trans person is often times untrue. I think the fact that trans people have mental illness is only correlated because trans people are more likely to suffer abuse ... 
AJ: And trauma. 
TM: And trauma, and they don’t have mental illness because they’re trans but because of the abuse and the traumas that they suffer as a result of being trans. 
AJ: Hmmm – that’s very well stated. I just want to interject a little bit at this point that a really significant reason for this project is to dispel the myths that there is one single story that all transgender people relate to and there’s multiple ways to express your gender and transgender people are a multiplicity of ethnicities and sexual orientations and identities and so forth. So that’s a big part of this project, but I just wanted to hear your thoughts on what this single narrative is. 
TM: I can only speak about my experience ... 
AJ: Yeah, absolutely. 
TM: My experience has been ... the first thing I experienced was trans misogyny when I came out. 
AJ: Can you define that for our ... in your terms? 
TM: It’s mainly transphobia that is directed against trans women or people who are perceived to be women. So it can happen to ... primarily AMAB people, but also AFAB people. But ... 
AJ: And when you use those terms you mean assigned male at birth and assigned female at birth. 
TM: Assigned female at birth, right. But, primarily trans women and trans feminine people. And, a lot of policing from within the trans community? So that was discouraging, but I knew what my identity was and so I wanted to explore that some more. So I started reaching out on social media and found some avenues there and found some successes and some failures, but I did make some good contacts. I’ve remained in contact with a lot of people from some early experience there and so trans misogyny was the first part and the second part was the trans narrative of the binary, the femme binary and going to various support groups you see differing Tamlyn Murray shades of that – some adhere to that very closely and some are more diverse as ... let me just speak about my passion. 
AJ: OK. 
TM: I think that’s a better way to explain what the gist of the issue is. I’m passionate about all transgender, non-conforming, gender queer people being represented. So when I publicly came out and came into the public sphere and support groups and work and that sort of thing, I was discouraged to see that not everybody was being equally represented. It was difficult for me because I’m a shy person, but I also found a role to play. So being kind of an actor-type person, when I have that role to play and I have the language, then I can advocate and so I’ve learned to be more of an advocate and I’m not terribly good at it right now. But, I’m learning. So I’ve made mistakes, but I’ve also heard the voices of people who are not being represented and tried to bring those issues to the forefront – and it is difficult. Issues like people of color not being heard or being turned away or being openly ... 
AJ: Discriminated against, maybe? 
TM: Discriminated, or worse. 
AJ: Harassed? 
TM: Yeah, harassed. Non-binary people being ... most of it is passive aggressive, but yeah – some of it is open. I’m guilty of some of this too because I’m white, I grew up in a suburban environment and came from a place of privilege, so a lot of this is engrained in the systemic white supremacist environment that America has come to be. 
AJ: Wow. Or yeah, I would argue that America has always been but ... 
TM: Well that’s true, and that’s something that I’m still learning and coming to terms with. But, it’s difficult for a lot of people to hear that, for a lot of white folks to hear that their actions may have caused somebody to feel left out – or worse, that they may have cut someone off from resources because of their own race and their reaction to the taboo against not talking about race. 
AJ: Wow – man, you’re bringing up a lot of topics here. You mentioned internalized transphobia when you talked about policing within the transgender community, I want to hear a little bit more about that and what has been your experience. And then, I certainly want to get into this issue around race and how that plays a role in gender expression and gender advocacy and gender rights. And then, you also talked about being in this sort of sticky state by being sort of gender non-conforming. So why don’t we start there and then work our way back through internalized transphobia and then sort of this race issue. How are you treated within the trans community and within the broader LGBT community around your non-binary status? I know there’s some pretty strong arguments back and forth debate going on, particularly around issues of the bathroom – that’s kind of a big deal. Have you been experiencing challenges around that or how are people within the community dealing with your gender non-conformity? 
TM: Well, bathroom issues ... I have my own bathroom issues. I’m agoraphobic, so I’m rarely out of the house so I have safe bathrooms that I go to. If I’m at work, I go to the bathroom when there’s absolutely nobody there and I use the ladies room. The same with being at a coffee shop or a support group and those are really the only places I go ... well, that’s not entirely true, I go other places. I’ll go to a movie, a matinee, but since coming out I’ve embraced the idea that I need to take more chances. But, getting back to being gender non-conforming, I haven’t experienced a lot of push-back. Some people have asked questions. For example, one of my co-workers asked, “Do you prefer the men’s or women’s bathroom?” I said I prefer the women’s bathroom and that was it. So, I’m out at work and I’ve only been mis-gendered a couple of times. 
AJ: By staff or by patrons? 
TM: By staff, patrons mis-gender me constantly because I don’t have enough money to continue laser hair removal or electrolysis or facial feminization or anything like that. I have a wig but I’m not happy with it and I can’t afford, really, to buy one. I have a beret that I liked to wear, but I dropped it, I think, on the driveway so I’m just kind of doing alfresco. 
AJ: Alfresco. So there’s this internalized transphobia that I think is a real thing. What about ... you know, you talked about trans misogyny, what about Black trans women? Are they the sort of canary in the coal mine in your estimation? 
TM: I’d say ... yeah, Black, people of color, who are gender non-conforming, non-binary, trans women definitely experience the most marginalization. Again, I can only speak from the experience that I’ve had and witnessed the voices that I’ve heard, the people that have come to me and said, “I don’t feel represented and is there anything that you can do for me?” And, it really comes down to a willingness on the part of the trans community to have the discussion and to break through the taboos about not talking about race and to take on an ownership about changing behaviors and ... there’s a lot of simple first steps that we can take, but there’s a lot of hard work that needs to be done too. As far as being canaries in the coal mine, that’s true in a lot of senses. 
AJ: I want to turn a little bit, Tamlyn, to a little more personal ... we’ve been talking about these broad issues, and I know you’ve said you haven’t really had the resources to pursue electrolysis and facial feminization, have you ... to the extent that you feel comfortable, have you undergone any other medical treatments towards your transition? And if not, do you plan to do some of those things? 
TM: I have. I’m currently on estrogen and spiro and dutasteride, which is another kind of testosterone agnes, and my results have been good. So no side effects really to speak of, side effects from the estrogen have mainly been kind of sexual dysfunction but my sexual desire was never really there to begin with. I was born with kind of a borderline intersexed condition so my drive was kind of not present. I identify as asexual on the asexual spectrum. I do plan to pursue more surgery whether or not that includes vaginoplasty, I’m not sure. I definitely want an orchiectomy because taking the T blockers ... you know, I really don’t want what’s down there but, at the same time, I don’t think I’m satisfied with the quality of the medical options that are out there – I think they’re purely for cosmetic purposes at this point. I haven’t come to an Tamlyn Murray emotional, psychological union at this point as to whether or not that’s something that I really want. 
AJ: Sure – yeah, that’s perfectly understandable. It’s an irreversible decision to make, Tamlyn. 
TM: That’s another thing, another part of the narrative that doesn’t get talked about, because, it’s something that anti-trans folks like to talk about, is the second guessing that people go through gender confirmation is remorse or ... 
AJ: Regret. 
TM: Regret. And it’s not necessarily wishing that I hadn’t done it or that they hadn’t done it, but maybe wishing for a different outcome or wishing things had been different or that they had done something differently. I think the narrative is that you hear, “Oh, everything is great, it couldn’t be better, I’m happier than I ever have been.” And you don’t hear the outliers, you don’t hear the people, “Oh, I’m struggling with this because this part of my body is gone and I’m dealing with this depression.” “It’s post-surgery, it’s really rough on me.” You’re not allowed to discuss those more constructive emotions because it’s supposed to be this happy, wonderful time that you’ve built up in your head as being so affirming. 
AJ: Right. 
TM: So, yeah, they’re just part of the trans narrative that people adhere to that don’t have to be that way. I think by having non-binary, gender queer, agender – people who don’t identify with a gender, having those people part of the conversation enriches everyone’s understanding of what gender is all about. If it means that there isn’t any one way to view a transition, it means that you don’t have to transition if you don’t want to, it means that there are different ways to navigate gender. 
AJ: Sure. 
TM: And that you’re not locked into just this one narrow path. 
AJ: Agreed. How did you come to the name Tamlyn? 
TM: Good question. I wanted to stick with something that was vaguely Celtic because my name is Irish and ... 
AJ: Is your cultural background Irish as well? 
TM: Yeah, half Irish, half eastern European. 
AJ: OK. 
TM: So, when I was identifying as non-binary, I switched it to Tomas thinking it would be more gender neutral. But Tomas means Thomas in most non-English languages. 
AJ: Yeah, it’s pretty gender specific. 
TM: It’s pretty gender specific. I soon came to regret that, but I liked the Tam part of it, people were calling me Tam and that felt right. So I was looking through an old ... kind of a surname Tamlyn Murray etymology thing that I found, and in a Scottish name guide I found the name Tamlyn, which it turns out is the medieval diminutive of the name Thomas, which is my dead name. So it’s ... Tamlyn, strictly speaking, is a boy’s name, but it hasn’t been used as a boy’s name in centuries. It’s more commonly, these days, used as a girl’s name and I just like it, so I’m claiming it as a girl’s name. 
AJ: There you go – thank you. 
TM: So that’s how I got it. It’s Scottish/English – kind of British, and I think I’ll keep my last name. 
AJ: And you’re saying that you’re going to pursue a legal name change? 
TM: Yes. 
AJ: Are you in the process of doing that now? 
TM: I am – yeah. Talking to my doctor, I thought I had my letter but apparently they never wrote it. So I’m in the process of getting that from them. 
AJ: So you need a letter to go to the courts and judges? 
TM: Well, I want to change my name and my gender marker at the same time. 
AJ: OK. 
TM: Because I need that change in order to change my passport, which I want to have changed before the 20th of January, and I don’t know if I can get all that done and through the courts before the screaming orange Cheeto can sign his pen ... take his pen to paper and sign all of our rights away. 
AJ: Right. Well, if you get it in the pipeline, if you get some appointments set up you may be able to get it done. It might not be done by the 20th, but it’s in process ... do you think? Or, no? 
TM: Yeah. I’m going to celebrate the remainder of the holidays in Wisconsin with my family and then come back home and do the legal name change. 
AJ: Wow. I know there’s a number of clinics around that are helping people do that. Are you accessing any of that at all? 
TM: No. That would be good to learn about some of that. 
AJ: Yeah. I’ve seen a few notices on my Facebook page that people are ... I think OutFront Minnesota is helping ... 
TM: Yeah, well those places I know about. Roxanne, who worked with OutFront, probably has some resources so I can always contact them. 
AJ: Wow, you say you identify as asexual. Have you ... so that means necessarily not having sex. 
TM: Yeah, there are a lot of misconceptions about being asexual. 
AJ: OK. Tamlyn Murray 
TM: In my case it means that I enjoy sex but really only after I’ve formed kind of an emotional bond with somebody. 
AJ: Is that a demisexual? 
TM: It might be demisexual – yeah. Or gray sexual or ... I think it’s demisexual. I’m not entirely sure but yeah, there’s a lot of misconceptions surrounding asexuality. Yeah, asexuals are not included in the conversations on sexuality. 
AJ: Yeah, because I think a lot of people just assume there’s no sex. 
TM: There’s no sex, so why bother including us. 
AJ: I was going to follow up and just ... maybe it means no to little sex, but it doesn’t mean that you don’t have relationships, I don’t think. You can have relationships without them being sexual and so, Tamlyn, who are you attracted to sexually? What’s your sexual orientation in terms of gender? 
TM: I’m bisexual so I’m attracted to women and non-binary people and some men, some straight men. 
AJ: Sure. 
TM: But mainly females, trans feminine, femme people, and some men. 
AJ: Are you in a relationship now? 
TM: No. I’m not in a relationship phase right now, but that’s usually when something happens. 
AJ: Have you ever been married? 
TM: I have not. I’ve had relationships in the past but because I thought I was straight cis male, things didn’t go real well. I was trying to fit into a relationship where I was expected to act a certain way and I wasn’t acting that way. Like I told you before, I’ve never really conformed to those roles. 
AJ: Sure. 
TM: And I’ve never expected myself to do that. So, yeah – the relationships break down after a while and the conversation usually ends up like, “It’s not you, it’s me,” or, “I’ve found somebody else,” or, “It seems like you’re not interested anymore.” That sort of thing. But that’s the case, most relationships that a person goes through are total and utter heartbreaks until it’s not. 
AJ: Yeah, I guess I would say that’s true for some people but we ... is that your experience? 
TM: My really limited experience – yeah. I’ve had a handful of relationships and ... 
AJ: And most of them have ended in heartbreak. 
TM: Yeah. 
AJ: Do you think that’s related to your gender identity? 
TM: It’s more related to how much I invest in my relationships. I have a tendency to idealize, to kind of fall in love with love and to really romanticize the relationship. 
AJ: Not the person. 
TM: Yeah, probably not as much. And when the person doesn’t live up to those expectations then I get really super let down. 
AJ: Yeah. Have you ever been involved in any LGBT organizations or ... as a volunteer or as work? 
TM: I have not. 
AJ: Haven’t you? I thought you were a facilitator for the transgender project at ... 
TM: Oh yeah. I’ve facilitated for the Minnesota Trans Health Coalition. 
AJ: I think that’s an LGBT organization. 
TM: Well, now that you mention it – yeah. 
AJ: It’s ... trans is a part of that acronym, but transgender people can be bi as you are, and lesbian or gay or heterosexual. 
TM: Yeah, that’s how I met Roxanne and a lot of ... most of my contacts. 
AJ: Who was the first transgender person you ever met? 
TM: That I remember? That I knew was trans? 
AJ: That you knew was trans, yeah. 
TM: I’m trying to remember her name – she’s got fantastic strawberry red hair and I could pull up her name on Facebook, but she’s got wonderful blue eyes and she’s a great dresser. I’m going to have to look her up. 
AJ: Not Morgan? 
TM: No, not Morgan – and her hair is black now. 
AJ: Morgan O’Sullivan? 
TM: No, no – I’m thinking ... this is going to bug me. 
AJ: Yeah, Morgan O’Sullivan is a pretty much a redhead, strawberry redhead. I don’t think she’s going to change to black so we’re probably thinking of a different person. 
TM: I have a Facebook friend, Morgan, who has black hair. 
AJ: Well, while you’re looking that up, are you out to your family and friends? 
TM: Well, I’m not out to my family. I’m out to everybody else. 
AJ: So you said you’re going to Wisconsin to celebrate Christmas in a couple of days. 
TM: It could be my last Christmas with my family – yeah. Tamlyn Murray 
AJ: Do you plan to come out? 
TM: Yes. Yeah, I’ve reached that place, and I’ve talked this through with my therapist, that place in the valley where going back to the place of comfort has no reward and approaching that uncomfortableness is a lot less scary and the danger of not doing so is greater than the damage for staying in the closet. 
AJ: So you’re at that point, have you thought through what you’re going to say? 
TM: Yeah, I’ve got a letter drafted. So I’m going to submit a letter to my mom and I’m going to give it to her and then wait however long it takes ... it could take a week, it could take months until she decides this is what I’m going to do. They’re very conservative Catholic people. My mom could be very understanding and say, “I love you, this is how it is and I’ve seen your panties and your lady clothes in the laundry and I’ve known for months.” Or she could say something completely different, which I’m not going to think about. 
AJ: How has it been ... have you had any challenges with ... you talked about the medical institution and some of the challenges that you’ve had there, but other ... like the police, looking for employment or colleges, school institutions? Any negative experiences in that regard? 
TM: Related to being trans? 
AJ: Yes. 
TM: I’m sorry, I’m dividing my attention here. 
AJ: I know, it’s kind of hard to compete with Facebook – there’s a lot more people out there than I am. 
TM: I’m just going to close this because my ability to pay attention to more than one thing is somewhat limited. OK, so the question was have I experienced anything in relation to school and ... was it work? 
AJ: Work, the criminal justice system, police departments ... any of our societal institutions that we interact with on a daily basis. Have you had any negative and/or positive experiences since you’ve come out? 
TM: I’ve kept myself in that safety bubble so I’m really only in queer safe spaces. 
AJ: Makes sense. 
TM: So I’ve elected to be in the negative places that I’ve put myself in and I’ve really only grown from that, and I’ve gained a lot more positive out of it – like the people that I’ve met and the experience that I’ve gained. So yeah, I’d have to say that I’ve gained a lot more positive than I’ve experienced negative. 
AJ: That’s beautiful. What do you think the relationship is between the LGB and the T? Tamlyn Murray 
TM: I think that the T just kind of got lumped in there somehow. It’s fortuitous for the trans community that we’re part of a larger marginalized community because we have, ostensibly, advocates to speak on our behalf, right? 
AJ: Theoretically. 
TM: Theoretically. However, Gay, Inc., is throwing it’s money into legislation that openly discriminates against us, that encourages bathroom bills that overlook or openly discriminates against our rights. So what are we supposed to do? We’re openly derided for not advocating for ourselves but we’re such a small portion of the population that we need help, and we are, in large part – as is most of America if you want to go to those lengths, part of the LGB spectrum. I’d say most of America, that’s being overly optimistic, but I think more people in America are sexually fluid and just have never been open to do a little exploring. 
AJ: Wow, that’s a little optimistic, I would say – but yeah. Last question, Tamlyn. Where do you see the transgender movement in years from now? 
TM: Fifty years? Wow. Fifteen years ... well years, I can just throw anything out there for years, but trying to keep it in a realistic vein, I’d just like to see a world where the trans experience is just part of the fabric of everyday life, or even celebrated – I mean, wouldn’t that be great. 
AJ: That would be amazing. I think it should be. 
TM: If it’s up to me, the trans experience would be celebrated but I would settle for just being left alone -but that’s me. I’m learning to advocate for myself and to advocate for my rights and to get out of my shell and not be under the heel of people who say, “You’ve got to conform to this, you’ve got to be male, you’ve got to conform to this narrative, you’ve got to do it this way,” and to advocate for people who don’t have a place. So, I’m learning to come out of my shell in a lot of ways. 
AJ: Wow. Well this has been a fascinating conversation, Tamlyn. 
TM: Thanks for talking to me. I never in a million years would have thought I’d get to talk to you. This has been great. 
AJ: Yeah, this has been fantastic. I appreciate you coming out on this cold winter day. You say you don’t go out very much so it’s an honor to have you here. 
TM: This was too good an opportunity to pass up. 
AJ: All right. Well, until we meet again, my friend. Bye-bye. 