Ash Scott 
Narrator 
Andrea Jenkins 
Interviewer 
1 Andrea Jenkins -AJ 
2 Ash Scott -AS 
4 AJ: 	So, my name is Andrea Jenkins, and I am the Oral Historian for the Transgender Oral History 
Project at the University of Minnesota. Today is date is October 29th… 
7 AS: Yep. 
9 AJ: … and… 2015. And I am here with Ash Scott. Uhm, and, Ash, why don’t you tell us your, uhm, 
your name, however you prefer to pronounce that, uhm, your preferred pronouns, gender identity, and your gender assigned at birth. AS: Okay, uhm, I am Ash, or full name, Ashely Scott. Uhm, everyone calls me Ash. Uhm, I also go by Ashden, uhm, in the drag community. Uhm, I got by he’s, male pronouns. 
16 AJ: Mhm. 
18 AS: And I was a female at birth. And, was that all of them? 
AJ: Uh, gender identity. AS: Gender identity. I am a man, male. Trans guy. FTM. AJ: [Laughs]. Alright. Wow. Thank you. Uhm, so, Ash, tell me about your earliest memory. Like the 
earliest thing you can remember. Doesn’t have to be trans specific though if it is that’s fine too but just the earliest thing you remember. AS: The earliest thing I remember. Uhm, I guess the earliest thing I remember is a feeling… 
AJ: Mhm. AS: … of something wrong. Not being, not, something, I guess, that made that, that’s not right and trying to figure that out. Kind of an inconsistency, you know. Most people have a calm. I didn’t have a calm. It was kind of a turbulence. 
36 AJ: Wow. How, how old do you think you were when you first recognized that feeling? 
38 AS: Uhm, I guess I was about or 5. My grandmother says I have an old soul so I’ve always, I’ve 
39 always known things, I guess, above times than I should. 
41 AJ: Huh. Where did you grow up? 
43 AS: What time of the year? Uhm, it’s usually, this is what I say most of the time. I’m an Air Force brat 
44 so I was born in California, uh, Castle Air Force Base. Uhm, then we moved… 
46 AJ: What Air Force base? 
AS: Castle Air Force Base. AJ: C.A.S.T.L.E. 
AS: Yup. Just like a kingdom. [Laughs]. It’s in Merced County so it was, uhm, northern California. 
Uhm, we moved to Grand Force Air base. AJ: Mhm. 
AS: Uhm, and that’s where my little sister was born. And then from there we moved here, uhm, 
because my dad was an airplane mechanic through the military so he came on worked for 
Northwest. Uhm, in the summers I was always in Louisiana or Philadelphia, which is where the 
southern dialect, you know, comes out… 
AJ: [Laughs]. AS: … you know, a little bit and everything. And, uhm, yeah just kinda moved around but most of my 
education was here or Iowa. 
AJ: Here or Minnesota. AS: Yeah. AJ: Mhm. So where did you go to elementary school? AS: Uhm, I went to elementary school, uhm, the first one I really don’t remember but, uhm, started 
third grade, uhm, Inner Grove Heights at, uhm, Pine Bend. AJ: Huh. What was that like? AS: Uh, so Inner Grove Heights, Minnesota it’s very rural. AJ: Mhm. 
AS: Uhm, and it’s very… non-diverse. Uh, it’s a lot, it’s a lot better now but when I was there it was 
very non-diverse so I was the only African American student, uhm, pretty much in my classroom. 
I think there were maybe one or two others possibly in the grade. Uhm, so it was very few of us. AJ: So you didn’t interact with them very much or… AS: Not really. So, you know, I was kind of the “white black” person. [Laughs]. I was called that 
because, you know I speak proper speech, you know, everything like that so like, “Oh, you’re 
not..” 
AJ: Right. So people gave you a hard time about that? The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies 
University of Minnesota AS: Yeah, very much. You know, if I came back, you know, came back… AJ: White people or black people? AS: Uhm, both, truthfully. I’d come back from a summer trip or something like that and I was in 
Louisiana my drawl comes out… AJ: Yeah. AS: … a lot more. I have to switch back. So, you know, they’ll sit here and say, “Say this word. Say 
this word.” AJ: Uhuh. AS: And I’ll just say it, you know, not, without thinking about it and then, you know, and then after 
awhile I’d be like, “What’s going on?” And I’d be like, “You know what, [laughs].” AJ: Wow. AS: I mean, it makes me unique so. AJ: Yeah. Was there any, uhm, bullying going on in terms of being a black kid in a pretty 
predominately white environment or…? AS: Not too much, I mean, I’ve always been a… AJ: Or your gender identity or anything like that? AS: Uhm, throughout high school and everything, uhm, I really didn’t have a gender identity. I guess 
it wasn’t really questioned or anything like that. And I really didn’t know, nonetheless either. 
Uhm, and… AJ: You’re not explicitly a girl or a guy. You’re just kind of… AS: No, I’m just me, yeah. Pretty much. Uhm, and, you know, I, I liked boys because I guess I was 
supposed to… AJ: Mhm. AS: But it didn’t feel right. AJ: Mhm. AS: Uhm, and I actually did question, uhm, you know, liking girls too much. You know, it’s just, you 
know, some idea, you know, friends and stuff like that. But truthfully, I really didn’t have, I 
guess, like sexual energies or feelings and stuff like that or worried about, you know, dating 
people or, you know, being with, you know, this or that or the other throughout high school and 
The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies 
University of Minnesota everything. Uhm, as far as bullying and stuff like that I had, you know, like a group of girls that, 
you know, used to, you know, somewhat try to pick on me and everything like that, uhm, and 
boss me around. You know, just because I was, I guess, a gentle giant, you would call me. AJ: Mhm, mhm. AS: Uhm, but you know, I was taught those were the ones to look out for. I mean I can handle 
myself if I needed to but not, uhm, but I’ve always been, you know, I was like a 5’9” so I’m one 
of the bigger guys. And I had the ability to fit into every single group, you know, every click that 
there was. AJ: Right. AS: Uhm, in high school, so, you know, I was used as an asset by the teachers, you know, and people 
came in, new people, you know, I introduced them around and, you know, show them the 
school and stuff like that. AJ: Say, say that again. You were used as a… AS: Uh, what did I say? AJ: What’s the term? AS: Uh, let’s see. Messing me up [Laughs]. 
AJ: But I just want to make sure we get. AS: Yeah, not quite like an instrument but, you know, I was beneficial… AJ: Okay. AS: … to be able to, uhm, you know, introduce people to everybody. AJ: So, you were an asset because you had these relationships. 
AS: Yeah, very much so. Great communication and stuff like that. AJ: Multiple groups and… AS: So, uhm, it was, you know, everybody knew me. I might not have known everybody but they 
knew me. [Laughs]. AJ: Oh wow. AS: So, you know, I had a teacher that, uhm. AJ: So you were kind of a popular… 
The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies 
University of Minnesota 
AS: I guess, I guess so, but, you know, truthfully, I’m very introverted. I’m very, you know, I guess 
not popular. Like I said, just me. AJ: Mhm. AS: You know, if I was able to be, uhm, I guess, if you say you could be anybody to let you know who 
you are, I’d pick Steve Urkel. AJ: Oh wow. AS: You know, that’s kind of who I am. Uhm, you know, in my drag persona is Stefan Urkel. AJ: Oh wow. 
AS: So, you know, we’re two polar opposites but yeah. AJ: Yeah. [Laughs]. Uhm, Stefan Urkel. AS: Yeah. AJ: Okay. So, and that’s, uhm, is that Urkel’s sort of alter ego? AS: Pretty much so, yeah. When he goes into the transformation chamber that’s his very cool 
identity, you know? AJ: Oh, okay. AS: Got it, got it. The Rico Suave, you know, like the, so. 
AJ: Yeah, you don’t strike me as a, as an Urkel kind of person. AS: [Laughs]. AJ: But I’ll take your word for it. AS: Yeah, yeah I can be nerdy, geeky, you know, all of the above. AJ: Huh. 
AS: I’m not super, you know, nose down, you know, what you… That’s extreme but, I guess for the 
most part. AJ: What was the first time that you realized that you were not the gender you were assigned at 
birth? AS: Uhm, hm… that’s a hard one. I guess specifically when I got that information and everything. 
The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies 
University of Minnesota 
AJ: No, when you… AS: Just had the feeling? 
AJ: Like when the light bulb just hit you like wow, “This is not who I am. I gotta make some 
changes.” AS: Uhm, the thing I kind of always knew, like when you asked what’s the first thing that I remember 
is that feeling. AJ: Mhm, mhm. AS: Uhm, and, you know, it was definitely in terms of something was off. Something was not, you 
know, it was not right with me or something was amiss. AJ: Mhm. AS: Uhm, and, you know, always persevering to figure out what it was and everything like that. 
Cause I think that the most comfortable that I could be in my skin was during Halloween or 
something where I could pretend to be something else. And usually it was a vampire, a male 
vampire at that. AJ: Okay. The male Lestat. 
AS: Pretty much, you know, Dracula. You know, so like that in, uhm, being a male of sorts, you 
know, dressing in masculine clothes and stuff like that. You know, uhm, looking back I constitute 
the way that I was raised was kind of as the older brother, uhm, with, but my parents, you know, 
I don’t think they actually knew how I was, you know, being treated and raised and stuff like 
that. Uhm, so that’s kind of always how I’ve been, you know. AJ: Wow, okay. Uhm, so you describe yourself as a trans man. When did you come to use that 
language [cell phone rings] and… AS: Sorry, let me turn that off. AJ: When… so when did you come to use that language and then how has that changed over time? AS: Uhm, let’s see, growing up I didn’t even know about transgender. Uhm, and everything like that. 
Uhm, and, you know, gay and lesbian I kind of knew about it but it wasn’t like quite out there 
especially, you know, being in rural Minnesota in Grove Heights. So I was like, okay. Uhm, it’s, 
you know, it took me awhile. It was actually coming out of high school, uhm, my senior year and 
everything like that that I took up the, uhm, the term of being, uh, lesbian. AJ: Okay. The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies 
University of Minnesota AS: Uhm, to move forward this was what I was supposed to do and everything. And so, uhm, that’s 
how I identified for awhile. Uhm, but still something was amiss. It wasn’t right. AJ: Mhm, mhm. 
AS: So I’m like, “Okay, what’s going on? Is there something wrong with me, you know?” Uhm, and it 
actually took about, uh, or years after that. Uhm, through the military and after that and 
everything like that. So I got to Virginia and actually met a transgender, uh, guy, uhm, who did 
drag, uhm, which was something that interested me and stuff like that and got me into drag as 
well. AJ: He was a performer? AS: Yes. He, he was a performer, uhm, and actually got me, you know, my first number with him and 
everything like that. AJ: Oh wow. AS: And, uhm, it was then, you know, described and seeing him and stuff like that. And he described 
how he felt and stuff where, you know, there’s just, you know, like an earthshattering thing. 
Things just went off that just felt this like rush of relief that was like wow. AJ: Mhm, mhm. AS: That makes complete and total sense. AJ: Wow. AS: I guess that’s when I actually know that, “Hey, you know, this is real.” 
AJ: So this is about 24, 25. AS: Yeah, yeah, about that. About 23, 24. AJ: Okay. Uhm, do you, uhm, what kind of challenges have you faced since you began to express 
your true gender identity? AS: Well, of course there is family and friends. Uhm, not too much with friends cause I don’t have a 
lot of very many like close friends… 
AJ: Mhm. AS: … so not that too much, but, uhm, family was definitely one. AJ: Mhm. How so? The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies 
University of Minnesota AS: Moving through my, uhm, I guess my journey. Going through, you know, uhm, being a lesbian 
first and stuff. I lost my mother, uhm, through that. She actually, uhm, left for about a year. 
Uhm, we didn’t talk because there was a big, uhm, confrontation that we had, uhm, that 
revolved around my little sister. Uhm, which was the first time my mother ever raised her hand 
to me. AJ: Oh wow. AS: Uhm, and I decided, I said, you know, “I need to leave.” 
AJ: Mhm. AS: Uhm, for this. Uhm, cause they said, you know, I would, like I pushed it in their face all the time. 
And, mind you, I’m not running around with, you know, flags, I’m gay this that. 
AJ: Right. AS: You know, and everything like that. You know, I’m still doing what I was doing and knowing 
more. 
AJ: Sure. AS: And every time seeing me kind of like pushed the buttons. AJ: Uhuh. AS: Uhm, so I lost my mom with that for awhile. Uhm, but, you know, I’ve gained her back recently. 
She’s still, she’s still working on it and still has her things but, uhm, it’s kind of sad, I guess, 
through my family and everything like that. And, I mean, I kept, I contribute this to being in an 
African American family and stuff like that. AJ: Mhm. AS: Feelings and things like that aren’t talked about. Uhm, they were never talked about when I was 
growing up and stuff, you know. So it was like, how are you feeling about this and that, that was 
never done. It wasn’t until I got back from Iraq that I actually was asked, how are you feeling and 
stuff and needed to. I started developing my feelings after I came back from Iraq. AJ: Oh wow. 
AS: Uhm, so actually, you know, that hindered them knowing who I was as a person. AJ: Mhm. AS: Uhm, and stuff like that. And, you know, that kind of made it sad because it is all, you know, 
religion and stuff like that and suck it up and drive on. You know, you gotta be stronger than 
that, you know, we go through all of this adversity and stuff and it’s like… 
The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies 
University of Minnesota Ash Scott Interview AJ: Pray about it. AS: And it’s because of all of that, you know, made it more difficult, uhm, so it’s, you know, kind of 
one of those things where we don’t talk about it but, you know, okay. But they use the line as 
long as you’re happy, you know, you’re doing what you’re doing, you know, to make it better in 
their heads and their hearts… AJ: Sure. 
AS: … when you know it’s like okay it’s more difficult. So… AJ: So, so you had the, the, the really significant challenge with your mom. And thank goodness 
things have started to sort of shift back around. 
AS: Yep. AJ: But were there other challenges that you experienced like, I mean, you mentioned that you 
were in the military. 
AS: Yeah, uhm… AJ: How, how was being transgender in the military? And maybe you weren’t out. I don’t know but, 
uhm, but you were still a trans person even if nobody else knew it. 
AS: Right, yeah, uhm, that was during my lesbian time so I’m still GLBT friendly and all of that stuff. AJ: [Laughs]. Right. AS: Which we call a stud and all that stuff. So I was the male figure of the, you know, for the most 
part so it was still in that, you know… AJ: So you still had a male persona. AS: Exactly. It was still more in that, uhm, tune. Uhm, when I joined the military I had short hair. 
Uhm, my hair was about this short [places hand over head]. AJ: Wow, okay. AS: And so, you know, I first came, you know, you get the drill sergeants all in your face. AJ: That’s pretty intense for a female. AS: Exactly. You know, I had one in front of me, one beside me and stuff like that, and they’re like, 
“Hey, look what we got over here.” And they’re like, you know, what do you think, you know, 
are you confused? Do you think you’re a guy?” and stuff like that. 
Ash Scott Interview 
AJ: Uhuh. AS: You know, “Did you cut your hair just because you joined the army?” and stuff and everything 
like that. And I’m like, “No, it’s just been cut like this for years.” 
AJ: Wow. AS: And you know, this kind of hovered on me. I had to still be that because it was, you know, I 
joined in 2003. 
AJ: Uhuh. AS: So it was Don’t Ask, Don’t Tell still everything like that. So it’s not like I could be me, you know, 
except that, you know, the dark corners and stuff like that. 
AJ: Right. AS: Uhm, especially in Iraq and stuff like that. AJ: Mhm. AS: Uhm, so, it, it was a very difficult thing because it’s kind of like constantly being in a play or, you 
know, as an act or something. AJ: Hm. AS: You’re always wearing a mask. AJ: Wow. 
AS: Uhm, and not able to be something that you are. So you can’t talk about things that are, you 
know, hurting your heart or your feelings and stuff like that. You have to bury them because, 
you know, you can’t a mess. So if you’re having a problem with, you know, a girlfriend or, you 
know, a relationship or, you know, I’m sad because, you know… 
AJ: Cause there’s no one to talk to. AS: Exactly. Mom’s not talking to me or, you know, continues to do this and just not understanding. 
You can’t tell anybody that. So you have to constantly keep it to yourself. Uhm, so it’s a very 
difficult, uhm, sad and depressing, depressing time. AJ: Wow. So you were in the military in 02, 03. Were you still in the military when Obama was 
elected? AS: Yes. Uhm, I was actually in Iraq in 04, 05. AJ: Oh, okay. Ash Scott Interview AS: Uhm, so I actually, uhm, I actually got my, uhm, retirement as a disabled, discharged, uhm, in 
the summer of last year. AJ: Oh. AS: So that’s why I officially retired in the military. So I’ve been, I guess, in service for about 11, 
years. AJ: So, so you were there when Don’t Ask, Don’t Tell was lifted then. AS: Yeah. Uhm, definitely was, uhm, at that time and in drill and everything, but, uhm, I still had a 
lot of friends in there and that was, that was a great victory, that, you know, to be able to do 
that. I mean, the close friends that I did have in the military and stuff, they knew about it. 
AJ: Mhm. AS: Uhm, and some were the same way. Uhm, you know, at the time I actually met a person I was 
engaged to while, uhm, there. 
AJ: Mhm. AS: Uhm, in Iraq and stuff like that. You know, so to be able to find somebody who’s, you know, kind 
of like a lifelong friend and stuff like that. Also, being kind of gay and stuff like that, I accept you 
for who you are and, you know, be through that type of, uhm, I guess, journey together. Uhm, 
and to see, you know, it open up and stuff where you can now go in. Yeah, you can’t go in 
raising parades and stuff like that, you know, and… AJ: [Laughs]. 
AS: … have, you know, uniform with rainbow flags… AJ: [Laughs]. AS: You know, you can’t do that, but they would be like, “Okay, you know, they’re people too.” You 
know, you can serve with these guys. And, you know, everybody who walks into a shower you 
know they aren’t looking at you just because you’re gay or lesbian. Uhm, now watching the, 
uhm, fight with the transgenders, uhm, is, is very, uhm, is very inspiring. And, and, and the, uh, 
few guys that are actually doing it and, uhm, working for it, and the fact that they’re even talking 
about it… AJ: Do you know any of these guys? AS: Uhm, guys that are trans and in for… 
AJ: I just saw this one guy in a magazine who was just beautiful. He, uh, a Latino guy. 
Ash Scott Interview 
AS: Yeah, ripped and in the army. AJ: [Laughs]. Yeah. AS: I forget his full name but, uhm, I follow him, uhm, through Facebook and stuff. And, you know, 
watch the journeys and everything like that. I, I love knowing, I guess, uhm, other trans men. 
Uhm, and this is because going through I’ve only known maybe others, uhm, throughout my 
journey. AJ: In the military or just in general. AS: Uhm, just in general. AJ: Wow. 
AS: Truthfully. Uhm, and, you know, just found some in this area. AJ: Uhuh. AS: Uhm, so, you know, knowing their experiences and to be able to ask questions, you know, other 
than on, you know, face to face in person to see these people and stuff like that and how they’re 
developing and stuff like that. And to be able to talk about relationships and stuff like that it 
matters. And being able to do that now whereas opposed to when I wasn’t able to do that… AJ: Mhm. AS: … you know, because of Don’t Ask, Don’t Tell and because of, you know, how I was raised and 
because of all of this other stuff where I had to keep it in to myself and try to figure it out. Being 
able to is so alleviating. Like you let a lot off you, like I’m not the only one… 
AJ: Mhm. AS: … out there that feels this way or that’s having this problem or, you know, not only am I not the 
only one but by talking with somebody else I can help them as much as their helping me. 
AJ: Awesome. Uhm, do you think that the, the ban on transgender people serving in the military is 
gonna be lifted anytime soon? AS: Uhm, I think so. They’re actually, they’re working on it now. Uh, you know, it’s in discussions 
and, and is in the movement but I think it’s, it’s a monster of it’s own, uhm, as far as, I guess, 
transgender because there is so many polarities of transgender, uhm, that you could be on a 
scale. So it’s going to be the fact, okay, when is it this? Do they take a leave of absence, you 
know, are we going to have to put a label on it that, okay, you have to be fully transition or 
something like that when there is no full transition. 
AJ: Right. 
AS: You know, that’s, that’s a false that people think. Or, you know, fully transitioned. What is fully 
transitioned? You know? AJ: Yeah, what does that mean? 
AS: And, they’re going to have to, you know, scale that because, okay well do we stick you with 
somebody in there who still has these body parts or something like that. Does that make it, 
uhm, you know, okay for them? Is it going to put them in jeopardy, you know, and vice versa 
and everything? And that’s, that’s the biggest obstacle I see that is going to be for, for them to 
actually allow it. But if the military does find a way and does allow it that opens everything, 
everything else up for transgenderism… AJ: Yeah. AS: … as far as, you know, because that’s, that’s our high totem poll. You know, that’s when, that is 
accepted in the military then it automatically disseminates through everything else. AJ: When, when, when black people were able to, to serve fully in the military is when, you know, 
the push for more fair race relations in the country began and… 
AS: Right. AJ: … women… AS: Women serving and, yeah, exactly. AJ: Yeah, you know? Now LGB, LGB people [Laughs]… AS: Yeah. [Laughs]. Definitely, you know. The, the movement is going and stuff like that. 
AJ: Even though trans people are LGB people too and straight too. AS: Very much so. [Laughs]. AJ: Yeah. Or pan or omni or a or [Laughs]. AS: Yeah. The letters in the alphabet, yeah. Just am you. AJ: Wow, so you’re, you’re discharged as a disabled veteran. 
AS: Yes. AJ: Do you want to talk about your… were you injured or? AS: Uhm, I had a few things. Uhm, I was in, uhm, Balad, Iraq in 04, 05, uh, which they call… AJ: Which part of Iraq? 
The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies 
University of Minnesota Ash Scott Interview AS: Balad. AJ: Balad. 
AS: Yes. It’s a little bit underneath, uh, where the triangle is. AJ: Mhm. AS: Uh, and they call it Camp Anaconda or, uhm, they also called it, it was nicknamed Mortarsville. AJ: Oh why? AS: Uhm, and they called it Mortarville because the native people that, that had the, the, uhm, 
issues would come up in their vehicles of choice and somebody would be in the back of the 
pickup or in the trunk or something like that with it open. They’d go up to the gates, whip 
around, and they’d shoot off a mortar. Uhm, so with those it’s not targeted or anything like that. 
It’s just shot off. So where it lands, it lands. Uhm, so, you know, you constantly heard these, you 
know, sirens and stuff and you had to get, you know, in place and everything like that. 
AJ: Mhm. AS: Uhm, so, uhm, you know, you had those and then you have your, uhm, road trips where you’re 
out of the, uhm, the area, anywhere, you know, escorting and stuff like that, like the 
transportation battalion. And we, uhm, a lot of our units underneath were escorts to the big 
trucks and stuff like that that would take food and water and fuel and all that stuff. And so, uhm, 
we would, you know, be on road trips and they’re were a lot of, uhm, bombing and, and things 
like that… AJ: Mhm. AS: … that would happen, uhm, for it. And, uhm, you know, to be as, I guess, into that. So I was, 
uhm, walking home one day and one of the mortars came over the fence and, uhm, it hit, uhm, 
I’d say about, uh, I don’t know, like a quarter of a football field away from me. 
AJ: Uhuh. AS: So, you know, it was, it was decent close to me. It was enough for it that I felt the impact and it 
knocked me over. 
AJ: Absolutely. AS: Uhm, you know, woke up in a, it was like, “Okay, what just happened?” Uhm, I had a lot of, I 
guess, mental wars dealing with, you know, uhm, people above me that were not great. Uhm, 
you know, uh, sergeants and stuff like that that were indignant and would use me for different 
purposes and stuff like that. And I kind of got stuck in there. So, you know, had a bad time with 
that. Uhm, having to deal with the, uh, stuff about Don’t Ask, Don’t Tell. You know, always hiding, I guess. Uhm, you know, I got, uh, shot during a, uh, firefight or whatnot. Uhm, and it’s a 
kind of shot of hot brass coming off. I actually went and, uh, after you set off a few rounds, a 
few shells they are really hot… AJ: Mm. AS: … and got into my Kevlar in the back of my neck there and, uhm, sat there and burned the back 
of neck there cause it seared into my skin, uhm, all the way until it doubled. So, uhm, those 
were real fun times. I also had a, uhm, something, I caught something there [Indicates leg]. 
Some crazy kind of thing where, uhm, my tonsils swelled up to the size of shooter marbles. AJ: Hm. AS: The nice big ones. 
AJ: Big, yeah. AS: Yeah. And, uhm, it pretty much took off like my swallowing and stuff and made it hard to 
breathe. Half of my face got swollen. I was on two different types of, uhm, uh, medications like 
orally, and then also they had me, uhm, getting it through an IV and everything like that trying 
to get it done. And, uhm, after a while I actually spent New Years in, uhm, 2004. New Year’s Eve 
and the Halloween party with an IV in my arm. I Snuck out and went to the party. AJ: [Laughs]. To the New Year’s Eve party or to the Halloween party? 
AS: To the New Year’s Eve party. AJ: [Laughs]. AS: Uhm, and, uhm, a few days after that they actually, uhm, I went and saw an ENT, the, uh, Ears, 
Nose, and Throat doctor. AJ: Uhuh. AS: And they’re like, “Oh, no. Let’s get you out of here.” Uhm, so I got metabacked to Germany, 
uhm, and actually spent my birthday in Germany. Uhm, because a few days after Christmas, 
after New Year’s. AJ: Which day? 
AS: January 6th . AJ: Okay. AS: Uhm, so spent that there, and I didn’t even remember… they put you to sleep when, you know, 
they fly you out. Pretty much you’re on an IV. And I woke up. I was in a hospital bed, and they 
were like, “Yeah, they took you, they brought you in or whatever and looked at you and took 
The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies 
University of Minnesota Ash Scott Interview 
you straight to surgery.” Uhm, cause it was so bad so they took out all of my tonsils, all three 
sets of them… AJ: Mhm. 
AS: … uhm, are gone because of whatever I caught and got so. It’s, technically, I almost died about 
three times, uhm, in Iraq because of some stuff so, uhm, definitely not… AJ: Yeah, that was a fun time. 
AS: And I turned in Iraq as well. AJ: [Laughs]. AS: So, uhm, it definitely was, you know, a learning and left me with a lot of scares. And, you know, 
uhm, things that make it hard to I guess be quote, unquote normal. AJ: How do you deal with that now, Ash? AS: Uhm, it’s difficult. It, it depends on what it is exactly. Uhm, I have a service animal… AJ: Mhm. AS: … uhm, dog for PTSD. 
AJ: Mhm. AS: Uhm, and, uh… AJ: Can we put him on camera? AS: [Lifts dog up to camera]. Stick him up here, just like he’s laying at my feet right now. AJ: Hey Socrates. 
AS: This is Socrates, Socks for short. AJ: [Laughs]. AS: Cause he’s got little socks on. Uhm, but, uhm, I’ve had him since he was a puppy. And, uhm, had 
him for about, he’s seven now. He’s old, all this was black [indicating some fur that is now light 
brown]. Uhm, but he helps me with my PTSD, uhm, and my anxiety. Uhm, so, you know, he’s 
here as a friend, as a companion, you know, makes me do stuff. I have to get up on the days that 
I’m super blue. 
AJ: Mhm. 
Ash Scott Interview 
AS: Uhm, don’t want to get up, don’t want to do anything anymore. Uhm, and, uh, he makes me get 
up. I have to feed him. AJ: [Laughs]. 
AS: I have to, you know, take him out. AJ: Take him for a walk. AS: Yeah, I have to take him out and walk him. He’s every playful. He may be old but he’s very 
playful, and he’s very loving. You know, you see him, and he’ll nudge me and stuff like that 
cause he wants me to, you know, his little tail back here is shaking [laughs] and wagging. Uhm, 
but, you know, he definitely keeps me, and, uhm, I’ve kind of become more introverted because 
of PTSD and stuff like that. So he makes me have to get out there, you know. People see him, 
and it’s like oh, it’s a dog and stuff and you have to talk and go to a dog park every now and then 
and stuff like that. So, uhm, definitely helps. I go to groups. AJ: So a service animal, so you consider him a service animal but some people don’t let their service 
animals interact with other… 
AS: People. AJ: Animals or people. AS: Uhm, yeah, he, he is, he is a service animal. Uhm, there’s a lot where, you know, they have to be 
working and stuff like that. And, uhm, depending on where we’re at and stuff like that… AJ: Sure. AS: … uhm, you know, sometimes it’s not, uhm, you know, good. AJ: Mhm. AS: Or I guess, you know, right. He needs to be on the job… 
AJ: Yeah. AS: … more. Uhm, you know, but, you know, at home and stuff and that’s, you know, mainly where 
he does. Yeah, we do go to stores and stuff like that. I don’t have to take him as much to those 
places because I know my times and I know my triggers and stuff. AJ: Sure. Yeah. AS: Uhm, but, you know, like home and stuff like that, uhm, you know, I still have flashbacks. And I 
still have night terrors. AJ: Oh. Ash Scott Interview AS: And, you know, he’ll jump up on the bed, you know, if he hears me moving or something like 
that if he’s not already up there, wake me up. Or lay next to me, which grounds me, to let me 
know, “Hey, you know, you’re…” 
AJ: You’re home. AS: Exactly. You’re in a place where you’re not getting shot at and not doing any of this other stuff. 
You know, you’re here with me. You know, calm down. 
AJ: Wow. AS: Uhm, so, you know, without, truthfully, without him I probably would not be where I’m at right 
now because it took a lot of time. And, uhm, not only do I have metal stuff. I have physical 
things. You know, I have a really bad knee, uhm, shoulder stuff. I’ve had two knee surgeries 
already. Like, this year, it’s November. Uhm, before June I already had four surgeries, uhm, this 
year alone. AJ: In 2015? 
AS: In 2015. Before June I had surgeries. Uhm, and I’ve had two knee surgeries and stuff. I have 
fibromyalgia. I have chronic pain. And to deal with that, and, you know, I was dealing with this, 
you know, plus and everything like that for so long. AJ: Mhm. AS: And things still aren’t felt out. You know, we don’t know exactly what they are so I’m still in pain 
every day on top of, you know, the head stuff and you don’t always have somebody to talk to 
and everything like that. So it takes a lot out of you. This is a very difficult thing cause you have 
to be your own advocate and sometimes you fight so much that you just have to give up 
sometimes because you’re fighting so much and it doesn’t make sense why you’re fighting so 
much when this is something that, you know, I deserve or that I should have. You know, 
healthcare and stuff like that and you shouldn’t be fighting so hard for it. AJ: So, how, how, how has the military been supportive since you’ve been discharged? AS: Uhm, well, uhm, I get, I got disability through them. Uhm, I filed for disability, which, you know, 
it took a little bit, but, you know, once you get the work done and stuff like that, it’s worth it. 
[Laughs]. 
AJ: What about all these surgeries? AS: Uhm, the surgeries and medical issues, I am, uh, service connected disabled. AJ: Mhm. AS: So everything that I have is because of being in Iraq, military service for the most part. Ash Scott Interview AJ: Mhm. AS: Uhm, so they pay for everything. Uhm, and everything like that. And also, you know, being 
blessed because of the military and stuff like that, they’ve not accepted transgender serving in 
the military but they do accept with helping us, so they help me with transgender therapy. AJ: Oh wow. AS: And they help with hormone therapy. AJ: Really? AS: So I actually get my, uhm, shots, my testosterone, all of my needles, uhm, and stuff like that 
through the military. AJ: Yeah, that was gonna be my next question. Sort of, uhm, what medical interventions you may 
have had, to the extent that you’re comfortable talking about? AS: Uhm, I’ve, yup, I’ve had, uhm, I get that done. Uhm, the advocate. You have to constantly fight, 
uhm, for it truthfully. Because they’re still growing and they’re still learning. Uhm, and there’s 
not a lot of, I guess, doctors in there that know a lot about it. So, you know, you have to get it… 
There’s a lot of, uhm, there’s, there’s misgendering here and there, but they’re getting a lot 
better. 
AJ: So how long have you been on testosterone? AS: I’ve been on testosterone for a little over years. Yeah, I think it’ll be soon. AJ: What is it like? AS: Uhm, I enjoy it. I mean, uhm, I’ve always had problems, I guess, as a female and stuff like that 
through my, uhm, female track. AJ: Mhm. AS: And so, like my reproductive system has been shut off. I’ve had endometriosis and everything 
like that so painful, uh, periods and stuff like that. Uhm, so when I could, uhm, get on 
testosterone, you know, it kind of alleviated a little bit more, uhm, with it and shut down my 
system cause I hated periods with a passion. You know? [Laughs]. Because it was so painful. AJ: [Laughs]. I wonder why. AS: So, uhm, dealing with that plus, you know, it brought me a step closer to what I saw in the 
mirror. AJ: Mhm. Ash Scott Interview AS: You know, and how I felt about myself. You know, to get more, you know, I could get, I watched, 
you know, I weigh myself every week. Every time I get a shot, I weigh myself and I put the 
changes in a little notebook. 
AJ: Oh really? AS: Of my weight, my changes, the date, and stuff like that. I keep track of it. So all of my shots are 
in there and, you know, things that I’ve had so surgeries and stuff like that. Even if it’s like a 
knee surgery or something like that. AJ: Mhm. Yeah, no. AS: Uhm, so… 
AJ: It’s important to document. AS: Yeah, so seeing all those things. Like my first hair, like my facial hair is starting to fill out. You 
know, my voice is dropping. I sound like Peter Brady, you know, with all the cracking and stuff 
like that. Uhm, you know, I’m finding more hair on my body. I woke up this morning, and there 
was this hair on my rear end or something. AJ: Oh. AS: It’s like what are you doing? So, and… AJ: So now you’re becoming a hairy butt. AS: Yeah, it is, it’s like, it’s definitely a big experience and stuff and, you know, emotionally and stuff 
like that. So, you know, you kind of go through a little bit of, uhm, menopause, uhm, because 
you’re lowering your estrogen count and stuff like that so, you know, I went through the hot 
flashes and all that stuff. It’s kind of fun watching, you know, I’m gonna out my mom a little bit, 
but, uhm, you know, see her go through some stuff and whatnot. I’m like, oh yeah, I already 
know how that is. I get it about 4-6 times. [Laughs]. So yeah, uhm, it definitely was an 
experience. AJ: Did you have a hysterotomy. AS: Uhm, I didn’t have a hysterotomy. Paid through the military, I have a very high risk of breast 
cancer through my family. AJ: Mhm. AS: My mom has, uhm, there are kids on my mom’s, so she’s got sisters. 
AJ: Mhm. 
AS: Uhm, her mother has had breast cancer. Her, uhm, youngest sister had had it about 4-5 times 
and passed away because of it. AJ: Oh. 
AS: Her oldest sister, uhm, was diagnosed with it just a year and a half ago I believe. Uhm, my 
uncle’s had like, uhm, cancer sores. So it’s very high risk on that side. So I went and had the test 
done and everything like that. And because of that I was able to get the, uhm, military and the 
VA… 
AJ: Mhm. AS: … to do bilateral mastectomy… AJ: Okay. Wow. AS: … uhm which they took both of my chests out. And the doctors were like well, we’re not gonna 
put breasts in because he knew, uhm, that I referred to as transgender male and stuff like that. 
And he’s like, well, you know, there’s no need to put, you know, prosthetics because that would 
be next, you know and everything like that. And he’s like, “How about we fashion you a male 
chest, but, you know, we will put it as a that you’re getting this done specifically for the risk of 
breast cancer?” AJ: For the cancer. 
AS: And, you know, I just kind of benefited off of it to an extent. AJ: So kind of like an Angelina Jolie. AS: And that’s exactly what I tell people! And they’re like, “What?” And I’m like, “Yeah, you didn’t 
know about that?” [Laughs]. But, yes, I got the Angelina Jolie done. AJ: Okay. AS: Uhm, so I got it done for free. Uhm, so, you know, it’s kind of a curse and a blessing at the same 
time. Uhm, because of that you’re also at high risk of ovarian cancer if you’re at a high risk of 
breast cancer so I got what they call oophorectomy, uhm, which is a, uhm, they take out your 
ovaries and your fallopian tubes. So I still have a uterus and a cervix, uhm, but I don’t have the 
things that create the estrogen or that I can, you know, my reproductive organs technically. 
AJ: Hm. AS: So, I’ve got some of it out, which didn’t make sense to me. They could have taken it all out 
cause… 
AJ: So you have like a half reproductive system. The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies 
University of Minnesota Ash Scott Interview 
AS: Exactly, cause like research later on or whatever it’s like it’s gonna need to be done anyway. So, 
but, you know, you get what you can get. AJ: Yeah. Boy, I just don’t like to think of you going through yet another surgery. 
AS: Yeah, I guess, you know, kind of in my head I guess it’s kind of just something that has to be 
done. It’s not that I like having surgeries or anything like that. I don’t chase surgeries or anything 
like that. You know, people are like just keep having them but, you know, it kind of happens. You 
know, I’ve also had, uhm, I’ve got nerve damage after awhile being on crutches and canes and 
stuff like that. AJ: Oh wow. Yeah. AS: And also the use of carrying guns and dropping down, you know, to your elbows and stuff like 
that. I got, uhm, nerve damage so I don’t have, uhm, hand movement here. Uhm, before both of 
my fingers were gone. It’s called ulnar nerve palsy. and both of them were gone so I had to have 
surgery on it so I got half of my finger movement back but from half of my finger and over it’s all 
dead. I don’t feel any of it, and I can’t move it because of permanent nerve damage and 
atrophied muscles. 
AJ: Hm. AS: And it’s actually in both of my arms. So I’ll have to, I already have to have another surgery that’s 
already on the books, you know, scheduled and stuff so, for the most part so. 
AJ: Are you able to work out at all or? AS: Yeah. I can workout. And, uhm, I had to do a lot of physical therapy and stuff like that, uhm, to 
get back walking and everything with canes and crutches and, uhm, I actually have a personal 
trainer, uhm, who works with people who, you know, do a lot of physical therapy and stuff like 
that so we work on a lot of things that help condition my muscles, keep my muscles strong, and, 
uhm, strengthen, you know, joints and stuff like that. So I do workout to be a better me too plus 
I want more of a male figure since I’m adjusting, since all my stuff is adjusting more after 
getting, uhm, my ovaries out and stuff like that, I don’t make any, uhm, estrogen anymore. So 
my, where I hold my fat and everything has readjusted and been put in different ways so I can 
build more muscle and stuff like that. And I like to do that, especially like a lot more chest 
muscles and stuff like that cause I kind of like having a buff chest. [Laughs]. And, you know, I 
would like to have more definition and stuff like that. So, uhm, I’ve been working out at that 
more. Uhm, plus before all of the issues I fought, uhm, I used to do boxing. I used to do muay 
thai. Yeah, I did mixed marshal arts muay thai. I’ve, you know, sword fighter and stuff like that. 
You know, I was raised fighting, you know, pretty much, you know, tag you’re it, you know, with 
a pop and then running through the house and stuff like that, you know, with my little sister and 
my dad. So, you know, it’s like… AJ: So you’ve had this male energy all the time. AS: Always. Ash Scott Interview AJ: Yeah. AS: Yup. I was the one, you know, family member passed away or something like that my dad would 
come to me and be like, “Okay, you have to be strong for your mom and your sister.” AJ: Hm. AS: You know, and, and that’s what I look at. That’s what, you know, the oldest son, you know… 
AJ: Yeah. AS: … does and stuff like that, the person to pass down. And so that’s how I was always, you know, 
treated. 
AJ: Mhm. AS: You know, in my heart sometimes I was crying and was like, “What about me?” You know? Who 
hold me up, you know? Who do I go to? Who’s strong for me because, you know, I’m missing 
these people too. AJ: Right. AS: Uhm, so, you know, that kind of made me, I guess, even harder. 
AJ: Mhm. AS: And, you know, that really made me look at, you know, how I was raised and stuff, you know. 
It’s like you didn’t know this but you know you already treated me this way. You know, so even 
though you see me as, you know, you’re “little girl” or, you know, what was. It’s like, you know, 
actually in your mind, I never was. AJ: Right. AS: So. AJ: [Laughs]. How is your relationship with your dad now? AS: So, we don’t have a great relationship. 
AJ: Mhm. AS: Uhm, I’m not fond of him. I mean, I respect him as, you know, as a father and, you know, a 
provider and stuff like that. 
AJ: Mhm. 
Ash Scott Interview 
AS: Uhm, but other than that I don’t. I don’t, I had a really rough upbringing with him. AJ: Mhm. AS: Uhm, as far as the way we were raised and stuff like that. He had an anger issue. Uhm, and he 
was this very hard guy. Uhm, don’t know for what reason, whatever, but… AJ: He’s very… AS: Yeah, he’s a very hard guy and, uhm, you know, and I never quite understood and still don’t. 
And, uhm, you know, he’s a lot for outwardly things and stuff like that. Everything has to look 
good and stuff like that. And I don’t know why because he wasn’t raised in the best of, you 
know, things and stuff like that, but, you know, he’s really big on outlooks. How people see him 
and this, that, and the other. And it’s like, okay, but you need to be a person first. Uhm, so, you 
know, we, we constantly butt heads. He’s a Scorpio. Uhm, and we’ve always have. You know, we 
never really melded as a different type of being. And he didn’t quite understand it. Uhm, you 
know, so I can be around. AJ: You’re a Capricorn? 
AS: Yeah, I’m a Capricorn. So, you know, it takes a lot to get me upset and stuff like that. I, I see and 
feel a lot. I understand a lot. I’ve done people watch and, you know, hear a lot. There’s one thing 
in high school, you know, we had this big to do, go out and fight and stuff like that. You know, 
and something was amiss. You always had to be 100% plus, which you could never be. 
AJ: Right. AS: And, you know, fighting for that to get recognition to be, you know, for, to have them be, you 
know, proud of you, you know. It’s something that I always fought for. Cause I always felt that 
they didn’t. I still feel, you know, that my father’s not proud of me as a person. Uhm, you know, 
sometimes I feel like I just walk in a room and I upset him. Uhm, but, uhm, we had a big fight out 
and, uhm, at one point in time he, you know, he said, “I know you.” Cause like, “You don’t know 
me.” And he said, “I know you.” And I said, “Do you?” I said, “What’s my favorite color?” AJ: Mhm. AS: And he looked at me and said, “Well, what’s mine?” And I looked him dead in the eyes and said, 
“Green.” AJ: Mhm. AS: His face just dropped. AJ: Hm. 
AS: And I said, “Exactly.” I wear my favorite color every day. It’s blue. Blue jeans. Socks. Something. I 
wear it every day. It’s prominent. It’s not like you can’t see it but you’re not looking. Ash Scott Interview AJ: Wow. AS: So, you know, and I’ve always stayed to myself. Like I said, we didn’t talk about feeling and stuff 
like that so I stayed to myself in my own room and interacted with the family in that way and 
stuff like that. But, you know, not only be, I was a different person then. It didn’t feel right on 
my own. I didn’t feel, you know, like I belonged for the most part. You know, my little sister I 
could talk to and everything like that, but, you know, as far as parents and stuff like that, you 
know, he, he’s got this different energy, and it really, you know, it keeps me on edge sometimes. 
I don’t like to interact with him some days. AJ: Wow. AS: Just because, you know, it’s, sometimes I’m just so angry. You know, and sometimes I’m upset, 
you know. I forgive him for the stuff that happened in the past and stuff like that but also it’s 
like, you know, what’s your side? Tell me. You know, why do, why do I need to feel every time I 
come in or something like that, that I’m a disappointment to you? AJ: Hm. 
AS: You know, and, you know, and then on the backside my mom is like, “Oh, well.” You know, I just 
moved into my apartment, and my mom is like, “Well, your dad will help you with this, that, and 
the other.” And it’s like, I don’t want anything to do with him. You know, I don’t want to talk so 
if he talks to her and stuff and has this different thing. And it’s like completely different. It’s, you 
know, it’s, it’s a beast. I don’t know. AJ: Talk to me about relationships, love, like who do you date or you dating? AS: Relationships. 
AJ: Love. AS: Uhm. AJ: Do you like guys? Do you like girls? AS: [Laughs]. AJ: I don’t know. 
AS: Uhm, I’ve been in love a lot. I mean, I’m a lover. I’m an old school lover. AJ: Mhm. AS: I’m a hopeless romantic, I guess. I’m an old school gentleman and stuff like that. I love to woo 
and, you know, send you flowers and buying gifts and pamper you and stuff like that. Uhm, who 
do I love? I love whoever my heart speaks to. You know, whoever is supposed to be in my life Ash Scott Interview 
and comes to me that I find attractive or, you know, in a way that’s who I love as long as you 
love me as a person. AJ: Mhm. 
AS: Uhm, you know, it’s funny. I guess before testosterone I didn’t, I guess, like men. Uhm, or deal 
with them too much. AJ: Mhm, mhm. 
AS: Uhm, I guess to give them a chance for the most part. Now looking back at it, I was 
uncomfortable with my body. AJ: Hm. 
AS: I didn’t want to be looked at as, you know, like female and/or treated. So I was very 
uncomfortable. Uhm, so I was always with females. Uhm, and then, you know, afterwards and 
stuff, I was a little more okay. I’m open a little bit more to it. Uhm, and now it’s just, you know, 
kind of the way of the heart. You know, it’s whoever I’m attracted to and attracted to back and 
stuff like that. Uhm, what do I call myself. Am I bi? Am I gay? Am I straight? Lesbian? I had a 
question from a person I was in a relationship with actually asked me this, and, you know, I’m 
like I’m just me. I mean, why, why classify myself when it’s like technically I’m not in a class 
because of, you know, how I am, you know, gender wise, physically, and stuff like that. I have to 
just love the person regardless of what they have. 
AJ: Mhm. AS: Uhm, you know, a straight person with me doesn’t make me, you know, gay or lesbian or 
anything like that because they’re with me cause I have different, you know, stuff or equipment. 
Uhm, so why do I need to be, you know, different. So, I’m just me. I love who I love. Uhm, a 
mantra that actually, uh, I grew up by, uhm, is, my grandmother taught it to me actually. I was 
raised very religiously. I went to Sunday school. I was Baptist. And I taught children’s church and 
everything like that. So I know the bible and everything like that. AJ: Right. AS: Uhm, I go to church every now and then, but, you know, church is difficult for me cause of my 
PTSD and also just the way I grew up. AJ: Mhm. AS: Church is kind of, it’s not great for, I guess, GLBT people sometimes… AJ: It can be a little restraining. 
AS: … especially as an African American type community and stuff like that. So it can be difficult on 
top of all my PTSD so. Ash Scott Interview AJ: So the PTSD you have, I know you relayed to me earlier that sometimes being in crowds… AS: Yeah. Exactly. Minnesota State Fair or something, I’m hectic. 
AJ: [Laughs]. AS: You know, I go there, uhm, with my marching band that I help out and stuff like that. And we 
stay the whole day afterwards. 
AJ: Okay. AS: I proceed to go home and then I spend about an hour in the shower crying, uhm, because it 
takes so much out of me trying to, uhm, hold that in and everything and be strong. 
AJ: Uhuh. AS: To be able to handle that one day. Uhm, to go with them. AJ: You’re in the marching band. AS: I help, uhm, teach a marching band, uhm, in the summers, uh, with a high school that I actually 
used to march with in high school. Uhm, and they’ve done it every summer since I’ve been back. AJ: What high school? AS: It’s, uhm, Simley Senior High in Inver Grove Heights. And, uh, we do a lot of parades. We do 
parade marching. We don’t do field marching. Uhm, and we go out and have fun and I love 
giving back to the kids and stuff and everything like that. Uhm. 
AJ: So parade marching is just kind of a straight line whereas the field marching is where you make 
your own… AS: Yeah, you make all the designs and stuff on the field. 
AJ: Yeah. Yeah, we just do straight lines, uhm. We do a lot of stopping, stop and go. We do dance so 
you might catch us doing all sorts of stuff depending on the, you know, on the song. AS: On the song, yeah. 
AJ: Exactly. AS: So we really have a lot of fun. We actually went to, uhm, St. Louis earlier this year, uhm, and 
played at, uhm, the Six Flags and, uh, the World of Fun in St. Louis, uh, Kansas City. 
AJ: Which is kind of like the state fair, I mean. 
Ash Scott Interview 
AS: Yeah. AJ: I’ve been to a few Six Flags. AS: Exactly, we’ve been to the, uhm, with days like that, uhm, people who know, like the director 
knows about it. You know, his girlfriend knows about it. Uhm, a few of the parents do. Uhm, 
and, uh, a person that I was with at that time, uhm, knew how I was. And, uhm, was there too. 
So… AJ: It helps. AS: Yeah. So I had a lot of anchors and stuff like that that knew about me and a lot of, I’ve gone 
through therapy at the VA and stuff and I’m on medications. So, uhm, all that, you know, help 
for when days, there’s days when like they’re really, really hard. 
AJ: What instrument do you play? AS: I play the saxophone and the beri saxophone, uh, and also drums, like bass drums and 
everything. 
AJ: Oh wow. AS: So yeah. Yeah, I used to march with the, uhm, the beri sax, like, I like the big toys. AJ: Okay. AS: [Laughs]. So that’s why people look at me and like, “You’re marching with that?” “Yes, I march 
with a big thing, a harness and everything, and, you know, sit up there and work it.” AJ: [Laughs]. Wonderful. Uhm, and I understand you do drag. You talked about that a little bit 
before. AS: Yes. I am a drag king. AJ: Uhuh. AS: Not a queen. Nothing to say about queens, love to hang with them, but I am a drag king 
performer. AJ: I’m a drag queen too. AS: Yeah. Tempe is what they call a male impersonator, which is a drag king, uh, which is a female 
who is impersonating a man. AJ: Mhm. AS: Uhm, I’ve kind of grown up through that with being lesbian and to transgender now. Ash Scott Interview AJ: Mhm. AS: Uhm, and still perform. I actually do, uhm, the national circuits and stuff. I perform under Gay 
United States, uhm, most of the time. I started in 2009, and I’ve held a title every year since 
then. AJ: Is that right? AS: Yep, most people don’t know that. They just think, you know, I just kind of do drag and stuff. I’m 
very, very humble about myself. But when, you know, they see me on a panel or something like 
that or, you know, why I’m there, you know, helping, you know, do this, that, or the other. And 
then they see me coming out to perform and they see me come in with all my credentials, you 
know, my lace thing with, you know, my ribbon that’s got the sash and it’s got this and stuff like 
that. Then you’re really just like, yeah. You know, you have to do a little bit more, but I’d rather 
give back not because of, you know, what I have or whatever. I want somebody to notice me 
and recommend me because of how I am and what I do rather than, you know, all the golden 
bling I show you. You know, respect me as a performer and who I am. And, uhm, a lot of, that’s 
how I met a lot of the queens and performers here because they see how I go about doing it and 
everything. And they respect me for that. AJ: Mhm. AS: So when they want to work with me with that, you know, that’s the best reward that I can think 
of as a performer. AJ: To get the respect. AS: Yeah, exactly. It’s like just because I have this title I don’t think I should be treated, you know, a 
certain way. Yeah, maybe I should, you know, get this amount of money for booking or 
something like that but I’m just as apt to help out or donate for, you know, somebody trying to 
get somewhere as long as they’re, you know, fighting and they’re showing me. AJ: Wow. That’s, that’s awesome. Uhm, so you’ve, you’ve traveled all over the country? 
AS: Yeah, I’ve, uhm. AJ: Where are some places you’ve been? AS: I started in Virginia. Uhm, in Roanoke, Virginia at the park. That’s where I first started, uh, doing 
drag and everything. Uhm, so I performed in Roanoke. I’ve performed in, uh, North Carolina. In 
D.C. competitions. I’ve performed in, uhm, Maryland, Philadelphia, New Jersey, uhm, of course, 
here. AJ: [Laughs]. 
Ash Scott Interview 
AS: You know I was actually at the beginning of one of the shows, uhm, the Divine Diva Show which 
is on Thursdays at the Brass Rail. I’m actually the original devo. AJ: Oh wow. 
AS: Yeah. Uhm, and I do the talent search at the, uhm, the 90s. Uhm, it’s been a while because of 
surgeries and stuff but I’ve done those because we don’t have a lot of king strength in 
Minnesota so I wanted to bring it back to be like, “Hey, you know, come out. If you want to try 
it, try it. Get on stage and everything like that.” Try to build it back up. So as a performer who 
has titles and sashes and stuff, we’d come down every Wednesday night and perform with, 
uhm, all of the up and comings. Uhm, and stuff like that and just kind of tried to mentor them 
and help them out and be like, you know, it’s okay, come have fun. You know, regardless of your 
orientation, how you are… AJ: Do you see that as a path? I mean, I know the path for you, uhm, but being a drag male 
impersonator as a path to coming out as trans? Have you noticed a lot of people? AS: Uhm, not so much. Like, in my experience, not so much. I see it as more of a lesbian type, you 
know, thing for the most part. Because once you get to the fact with transition, I’ve seen a lot of 
them stop, uhm, because they don’t want to be attributed so much as a drag king, uhm, because 
it is, you know, male impersonation. They are now, you know, male where they want to be. 
Uhm, so I see a lot stop. Uhm, drag is an outlet for me, uh, with my PTSD. You know, I like 
making people laugh. I love, you know, interacting with them and giving them something 
different. Uhm, you know, and I love, you know, being able to exert a different side of me. You 
know, in my art. I do different types of arts and stuff like that. Uhm, and after going to Iraq, I lost 
interest in a lot of stuff. And that’s one thing that I could still do as far as acting and stuff like 
that. So I embraced it. AJ: And you mentioned you were in the marching band or in the band in the military too, right? 
AS: Yep. Uhm, actually after coming home from Iraq, I joined the Virginia National Guard Marching 
Band. AJ: Uhuh. 
AS: And did that where we did lots of parades, performances, anything statewide, stuff like that that 
we did. Uhm, I also did the Honor Guard, uhm, which is the military guys that go up and fold the 
flag. They play the trumpet. Uhm, they do the guy salute for everybody who, uhm, passed 
away, uhm, military wise. I did that for a few years honoring a lot of veterans and people. And 
that, that was an honor for me to be able to do that, uhm, for, you know, brothers and sisters 
that, that passed away. AJ: Sure. So what are you up to now? Are you, do you, working anywhere? Or going to school? 
What’s going on? AS: I don’t work right now. Uhm, right now I guess after my, my stints of surgeries and stuff like that 
I am, uhm, doing, back in school again. I’ve been to school, I guess, a couple of times. Through 
the military I was actually a multimedia illustrator. AJ: Oh wow. AS: Uhm, so, you know, I did fun stuff on PowerPoint, Photoshop, and all that stuff. AJ: Graphic design. 
AS: Yeah, that’s what I was trained in in the military. Uhm, and then, uhm, after that, uh, I did a lot 
of diesel mechanic. I worked on Volvos, and then I went to school for culinary, uhm, that’s 
Virginia Western in Roanoke, Virginia. Uhm, so pretty much got a degree for culinary. Uhm, and 
now. 
AJ: You can cook, huh? AS: Yeah, I can cook. [Laughs]. Now I am going back to school for my Associates in Fine Arts to kind 
of, uhm, beef up the art background. 
AJ: Sure. AS: Uh, cause, you know, with culinary and graphic illustrating it’s already an art background but it 
just beefs it up a little bit more. Uhm, you know, there’s never too, too much to learn new 
things and new tricks so I’m doing a little bit of photography, you know, drawing, painting, uh, 
ceramics. So it’s a little bit of everything. It kind of keeps my mind going and stuff so. AJ: Okay. You are just blowing me away here in this interview. Uhm, I think you talked about the 
first time you met a trans person, right? Your friend in Virginia who? 
AS: Yeah. He’s actually, uhm, my trans brother. AJ: Right. AS: He’s pretty much my brother. Uhm, his, his, uhm, his family, you know, kind of put me in the 
family, and he’s so close to me that he’s not even, I don’t call him my friend. You know, he’s my 
brother. AJ: Wow. 
AS: Uhm, for the most part. AJ: You guys still communication and? AS: We do, and he’s actually, he’s in, uhm, Kentucky, uhm, right now. And, uhm, you know, we talk, 
uhm, at least weekly and stuff. We usually use Vox so we do the walkie talkie on, over the 
phone. 
The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies 
University of Minnesota Ash Scott Interview AJ: Oh. Vox, yeah. AS: Cause we both don’t like the phone so we usually, you know, Vox-er it and stuff like that so 
yeah. Uhm, yeah, I’ve been trying to get him up here for a while. AJ: So what do you think about the relationship between the gay, lesbian, bisexual, and the 
transgender community? Is it good? Is it strange? Is it awful? Like, what’s your take on it? AS: Uhm, as separate or just as a whole? AJ: As a whole. I mean, it’s, it’s sort of classified as a whole community, right? AS: Yeah. 
AJ: The LGBT community. I mean people are very apt to say that. Uh, but, you know… AS: But very remised to forget all the parts. AJ: Right, exactly. AS: Uhm, you know, we kind of have our own, I don’t know, own nation within ourselves. AJ: Mhm. 
AS: Uhm, and, you know, we’re a very diverse nation within ourselves. And, uhm, we tend to, you 
know, like want to fight for rights and stuff like that but we forget underneath our things, 
separately, you know, the lesbians, and, you know, the gays and the bisexuals and the 
transgenders all together, they, you know, they want to put this big rainbow flag front but, you 
know, technically, for the most part, we are all, you know, we’re kind of separated, uhm, on a 
lot of things. AJ: Hm. AS: Uhm, especially, uh, transgender. Kind of like the redheaded stepchild, no offense to redheaded 
people… AJ: [Laughs]. AS: … uhm, but, uhm, you know, of the group because, you know, it’s always, okay, let us get this 
first and then we will bring you’re stuff in later. AJ: Mm. AS: Uhm, it is, you know, kind of the way it reads. And it is remiss. And, you know, there’s a lot of 
fighting, and, you know, segregating on this and on that type and stuff like that within ourselves 
underneath. So, you know, it’s kind of hurtful, you know, it kind of hurts your heart to see that. Ash Scott Interview 
You know, people that are discriminated against and hated against all the time are so apart from 
each other, uhm, instead of being, you know, brought together. Like there’s so much out there 
that is hateful in this world that, you know, want to hurt us and stuff like that. We don’t need to 
hurt each other. Uhm, you know, whether it be in, you know, like a drag community. And I do 
this type of drag as opposed to you do this type of drag or, you know, lesbians, you know, don’t 
want to be classified as, I’m a butch lesbian, I’m this lesbian, or you know, don’t be bi. You know, 
everything like that, and it’s like why do we do that? You know, it kind of brings me back to, you 
know, you have the black and white. You know, I’m this black. I’m this white and stuff like that. 
And even breaking it down even more, I’m this type of white or, you know, this is my 
background or even blacks, you know, where we go through, you know, a real African or, you 
know, you’re yellow, you know stuff like that. It’s always segregated. And it’s like why do we 
need to do that instead of just seeing a person? AJ: Mhm. Yeah. Do you think there’s a transgender agenda that’s in place or do you think there 
should be, and if so what should it be? AS: Mm. That’s hard. Uhm, it’s really hard because one thing like with trans stuff like that there’s a 
lot of in the closet trans that are undercover and, and don’t want to be put out there because 
we just want to be who we are. 
AJ: Mhm. AS: And in order to, I guess, speak about it, we have to… AJ: Undercover, you mean, don’t come out or they do come out and then they go stealth. AS: Uhm, kind of both. AJ: Yeah. 
AS: It’s very much both. AJ: Uhuh. AS: Uhm, and in order to, I guess, vocalize and to stand up you have to constantly put yourself out. AJ: Cause you could go stealth. AS: [Laughs]. 
AJ: Iraq vet. Got the beard thing going on. AS: Oh yeah. I have to truthfully convince people sometimes yes. AJ: Really? 
Ash Scott Interview 
AS: This is me. You know, or something like that. I have to have a picture of me, no, no, this isn’t my 
twin sister. This is me. AJ: [Laughs]. 
AS: Uhm, but yeah, there’s a lot that do that. Uhm, so it kind of makes it hard, uhm, sometimes. I 
think there needs to be more of a movement. I think we are slowly picking up movements. Uhm, 
you know, things are turning over. Uhm, especially in the military, uhm, you know, trying to 
accept talking about accepting transgenders. Uhm, you know, the different things and stuff like 
that as far as, uhm, social security, being able to change your, uhm, identity, uhm, in different 
states and places like that whether it be your birth certificate or driver’s license and all that 
stuff. AJ: Passport is even… 
AS: Yup. Things are becoming a lot easier and stuff like that. You know, uhm, and how to do it. Uhm, 
because there is so much of it. You know, it’s a little bit more. I mean even, you know, places, 
work places, and insurance companies and stuff like that. I was just reading online, uhm, they 
even have Medicare has opened it, uhm, for doing transgender surgery. Now do I know how to 
do it? Not yet but you best believe I’m working on it. [Laughs]. AJ: Working on it. AS: Working on that part but, uhm, you know, that, they’ve allowed it to be that it is a needed thing. 
Uhm, it’s not just some type of, you know, it’s not like getting breast implants because… AJ: It’s not cosmetic. AS: … yeah, it’s not cosmetic. It’s a necessary thing, uhm, to have a healthy life. Some, not all 
transgenders, need that. AJ: Right. AS: But, you know, for the most part, and the fact that they see that, just like calling it, uhm, you 
know, it was, uh, gender identity, uh, syndrome. It’s not a syndrome. It’s dysphoria because it’s 
not, you know, just something that you have. Uhm, so the fact that they’re moving to 
understand it more. Uhm, and it’s gonna take, it’s gonna take a while because there are so many 
shades of it. You know, if we, if any color we are, we are grey, uhm, in the many different shades 
within because there are so many different but we still are transgender. You know, I could be 
transgender and not have hormones. Or, you know, I could just be hormones and not have any 
surgeries and be transgender. So they’re, it’s doesn’t make me any less or any more. And it’s, it’s 
one we stop thinking about, uhm, physical bodies. Uhm, and just see a person as a person. You 
know, it shouldn’t be because I wear a dress that’s what makes me female or because I have, 
you know, tits and you know a vagina, I am a female or, you know, the alternative for male. 
Uhm, it doesn’t matter. It matters, you know, my soul, my aura is, you know, the person that I 
put out to you. And even on top of that, why, why does it matter whether I’m feminine or 
masculine? Because, you know, a feminine person can do a masculine job and can be masculine Ash Scott Interview 
at a certain part, point or part of time just as much as a masculine person be effeminate. You 
see that in, you know, single parents that are raising, whether it’s a mom or dad that’s being 
both, uhm, for them. And that doesn’t make them any less than the person that they are, you 
know. In, in some eyes, it makes them a hero because they are all encompassing. 
AJ: Sure. Wow. Uhm, some of the most visible trans people in our culture right now, like Chelsea 
Manning, uhm, Caitlin Jenner, Laverne Cox, like, what do you think of this new level of visibility 
that, uhm, trans people are experiencing? AS: Uhm, I guess that’s kind of split because some of them are great and some of them are aren’t. AJ: [Laughs]. AS: Uhm, and you know, I won’t say too much about it but Caitlin Jenner she’s going through her 
own thing and everything like that. Maybe the way that she came out and started it and 
whatnot and because there was such media on it, it kind of, you know, downplayed a lot of 
other people who are in the struggle and who have been working towards it, such as, you know, 
uhm, uh, just thought of her name, the one that does Orange is the New Black. AJ: Laverne. AS: Yeah, Laverne Cox. Uhm, and, you know, Chaz Bono whose constantly been doing this and stuff 
like that but haven’t gotten tons of overhead. AJ: [Laughs]. AS: And, exactly, and it’s like, it, it, you know, when Caitlin came out and everybody is like, “Oh my 
god!” You know, it kind of downplayed everybody. And it’s like, okay. Now we’ve got, you know, 
we’ve got a little foothold but don’t base it off of this. 
AJ: Right. AS: You know, keep going and working. AJ: Mhm. AS: Uhm, it’s nice that there are, there are some shows about it. It’s, it’s nice and it’s not nice 
because there still are a lot of people who don’t have open eyes. So take it and they twist it and 
reconstitute it. You know, sometimes they use it for their own agenda. Uhm, the way that 
people piece together things and put it up and are explaining. You know, they’re going to use 
this and they’re gonna use that instead of, you know, like the whole story or, you know, this. So 
they what to misuse it. You know, it’s just like all the stuff with religion where they, you know, 
want to hold up the signs and say, you know, this, Sodom and Gomorrah and whatnot but it’s 
like, well, okay, you don’t want to read the whole story that actually says it. 
AJ: [Laughs]. 
Ash Scott Interview 
AS: You’re just using it to, you know, place it into your own contextual things like… AJ: Sure. AS: … like if you knew it, read the whole story, it’s like you’re stepping on your own toes. [Laughs]. AJ: Right, exactly. AS: So, you know, it, it’s just, you know, gonna take a lot of movement and motion and, uhm, the 
people that are in the lime light and stuff, you know, they have to hold fast and make sure 
they’re, you know, yes, they’re on their own journey, but they are also representing. AJ: Mhm. AS: And I think first and foremost as long as they represent themselves the way that they want to 
see themselves and everything, then they will represent the community, you know wonderfully. AJ: Cool. Uhm, have you ever been engaged or involved in any LGBT or transgender specific 
organizations? 
AS: Uhm, not so, not so much. Uhm, I’ve got little ones, I guess, uhm, as far as ones in colleges that 
I, that I help out. I just took a, uhm, kind of a group, that, that was in, uhm, the community 
college that I’m in now. We made it a official group. AJ: Okay. AS: So we officially have a trans, you know, a, uhm, LGBT plus group and stuff like that. AJ: Oh wow. 
AS: You know, I’m trying to get out there and be known and stuff like that. AJ: And you go to? AS: I go to Inver Hills Community College in Inver Grove Heights. AJ: Uhuh. AS: Uhm, so, you know, we’re trying to do that. Uhm, I also help, I help with a, uhm, I guess trans 
groups throughout the, uh, through the VA. AJ: Okay. AS: And, uhm, I help out where ever I can to do, uhm, discussion. You know, discussion boards. I’ll 
be on those and everything… AJ: So there’s trans specific military group? Ash Scott Interview AS: There is. There are actually two of them. There, there are trans vets where we got the older 
ones who are, you know… AJ: Uhuh. AS: … uhm, and then we have one once a month for the younger… AJ: Oh wow. 
AS: … uhm, and that involves both trans females and trans males. AJ: Okay. AS: Uhm, a lot. So they, we actually do have, you know, group and everything like that where it’s all 
veterans where we can, you know, help each other with the PTSD and stuff. AJ: How are people are in these groups? AS: Uhm, wow, there are over 10. Definitely over 10. Not like, you know, we’re breaking 20s and 
stuff like that but we do have, we do have a lot. There are a lot of transgender people who are 
veterans, period. AJ: That’s right. 
AS: Uhm, that go through and stuff like that, which was, you know, an awe inspiring thing to me, 
uhm, with that. I knew there were a lot of, you know, like lesbians and gays out there. You 
know, cause they are undercover and, you know, they do all that stuff before. AJ: Sure. AS: Uh, when I went to Iraq, you know, you kind of have the world in one little place, you know. AJ: Mhm. 
AS: I’ve met people from Hawaii and, you know, people from, you know, the east coast, the west 
coast, all over the place. AJ: Puerto Rico. 
AS: Exactly. And, uhm, all come into one so, you know, you kind of see all of it, and the extremes… AJ: Uhuh. AS: … in one little group. Uhm, but, uh, yeah, we have a lot. It’s a great thing to see because we can 
help each other as far as navigating, uhm, transgender world and stuff like that. Okay, this is 
what you need, you know, to get your birth certificate or hey I’ll help you do all this paperwork Ash Scott Interview 
and, you know, I’m having trouble with, uhm, relationships. I’m having trouble with, you know, 
uhm, this community or something like PTSD or something. I hear people that have, that are 
fighting the same struggle as you… AJ: Right. AS: … uhm, at the same time. AJ: I mean, they’re dealing with the gender issue but they’re also veteran. 
AS: They’re also veterans dealing with it. And that’s a wonderful asset to have. AJ: Wow. years. Where do you see transgender community? AS: years. Uhm, in years I hope I don’t see a quote, unquote “transgender community.” AJ: Bing. AS: It’s like, you know, I just, I just hope to see, you know, people just in community, you know. No, 
no labels of straight, gay, whatever. You’re just you and, you know, you’re how you are and 
that’s accepted, period. AJ: Mhm. And you think we’re gonna get there? AS: I hope we get there. I don’t know, maybe. I don’t know if in years we’ll get there but we’re 
definitely moving. Uhm, you know, a lot of the youth and a lot of stuff like that they have open 
eyes. And they don’t care. AJ: Mhm. 
AS: You know, a lot of stuff is just old, but, you know, we still have to remember that, you know, old 
stuff does carry weight, uhm, and what not. I mean, we still see stuff with, you know, through 
racism and everything like that. And that’s old, that’s old. [Laughs]. AJ: It’s old. AS: So, you know, it’s, it’s always gonna come up, you know, as much as, you know, history. AJ: It’s changed, but it’s still there. 
AS: Yeah, exactly. And as much as history is important, you know, the more and more we dig it up 
and we keep recurring history and this happened and this happened and this happened. You 
know, it’s always gonna be ingrained in it. So, you know, it’s kinda always gonna be there but 
hopefully we get to a point where it doesn’t matter, you know. As long as you’re doing what you 
need to do, you’re happy and you’re continuing, you know, a well worth life. AJ: Hm. Thank you Ash for this fascinating conversation. 
AS: Thank you. I’m more than honored. AJ: I’m deeply honored to get to know you. AS: [Laughs]. AJ: Thank you for your service to, to this country and to the ideals of, uhm, freedom and 
democracy. And thank you for being an outspoken person in, in our community. AS: [Laughs]. You can’t learn anything if nobody tells you. AJ: Alrighty. Thank you. 