Joy Michael Starkey 
Narrator 
Andrea Jenkins 
Interviewer 
Joy Michael Starkey Interview 
Andrea Jenkins -AJ 
Joy Michael Starkey -JS 
AJ: So hello. 
JS: Hi. AJ: My name is Andrea Jenkins, and I am the oral historian for The Transgender Oral History Project 
at the Tretter Collection at the University of Minnesota Libraries. Today is July 5th, post- 
Independence Day 2017. JS: [Laughs]. AJ: And I am on the campus of the University of Minnesota today in Andersen Library, and I am here 
with Joy Starkey. How is it going Joy? JS: Good. AJ: Yeah? 
JS: Yeah. AJ: Good, good, good. Uhm, before we go too deep into our conversation, how about if you state 
your name. Spell it so we make sure we have the correct, uhm, spelling. Uhm, tell me what’s 
your gender identity as you define it today… JS: Mhm. AJ: … the pronouns that you use, and your gender assigned at birth. 
JS: Sure. Uhm, so I’m Joy Michael Starkey. Uhm, and that’s S.T.A.R.K.E.Y. Uhm, I identify as 
genderqueer non-binary trans person. Just like to make that as long as possible. AJ: [Laughs]. 
JS: Uhm, and I use— AJ: Say it one more time. JS: [Laughs]. As genderqueer non-binary trans person. AJ: Wow. [Laughs]. JS: I know, right? [Laughs]. 
AJ: It’s awesome. It’s awesome. 
Joy Michael Starkey Interview 
JS: Uhm, yeah. And I, uhm, I use the pronouns they, their, and them. AJ: Okay. JS: Uhm, I’m queer. Uhm, yeah. AJ: Assigned… assigned female at birth? JS: Oh, uhm, female assigned at birth. 
AJ: Okay, alrighty. Cool. So, you know, we’re just gonna talk openly and freely. Uh, but just to kind 
of get the memory bank working a little bit like what is the first thing that you remember in life? JS: I’m not sure, uhm. Wow. I’m really not sure. Uhm, I… uhm, I remember, uhm… uhm, I remember 
when, uhm, shortly after my little sister, uhm, was born, uhm, my sister is also trans… AJ: Wow. JS: Yeah. Yeah, my parents went two for two. 
AJ: Okay. [Laughs]. JS: They’re very lucky. Uhm. [Laughs]. But I remember going over and going to a garage sale and 
getting the, uhm, stuffed raccoon that would be my, my like favorite stuffed animal. 
AJ: Uhuh. JS: Yeah, his name is Zipper. AJ: Zipper? JS: Yep. And he is still with me. AJ: Uhuh. 
JS: And that’s definitely one of my first, my first memories. AJ: Okay, wow. JS: Yep. AJ: That’s cool. JS: [Laughs]. 
AJ: Uhm, so your sister is younger. The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies 
University of Minnesota Joy Michael Starkey Interview 
JS: Yeah. Yeah. Uh, yeah, she’s three years younger than me. AJ: And that’s your only sibling? JS: Yep. Yep. AJ: Wow and they identify as trans. JS: Yep. Yeah. 
AJ: That’s pretty unusual. JS: Mhm. AJ: I would say. JS: Statistically unlikely. [Laughs]. AJ: Statistically unlikely given that trans people constitute, what? About… .3 percent of the 
population? JS: Something like that. Yeah. Yeah. AJ: Uhm, you’re that PhD student? Uh [laughs]… 
JS: Right, right. AJ: … but I know it’s a pretty low number. JS: Yeah. I mean, do we really know though? We just have… AJ: Yeah. JS: … I feel like we have no idea. 
AJ: That’s just the very little documentation that happens. JS: Right. AJ: And there are so many people who, who deal with gender identity concerns or issues… JS: Yeah. AJ: … but don’t ever act on them or are very verbal about them. 
JS: Right. Right. And I think histor— like, I think at certain in our history we really had, uhm, a lot of 
language around medical transition and like people who, who identify as trans men and women. 
The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies 
University of Minnesota Joy Michael Starkey Interview AJ: Mhm. JS: Uhm, not a lot of language and not a lot of visibility around people who, who identify as… not, 
not that, not the gender they were assigned at birth but just outside of the gender binary. Or, or 
somehow gender non-conforming. AJ: Mhm. JS: And I think we are seeing more and more folks like us like find language and, and community. 
Uhm, and it will be interesting to see what happens. AJ: Yeah. JS: It’s a very, it’s a very strange time period. AJ: It’s a very strange time period. It’s, it’s moving… JS: Yeah. 
AJ: … rapidly. JS: Yeah. AJ: Things are changing. JS: Yeah. AJ: Just kinda want to stay in the early days for a little bit. 
JS: Sure. AJ: Where did you grow up? JS: So I grew up, uhm, I grew up in the suburbs. AJ: Mhm. JS: Uhm, so I grew up in a town called Vancouver, Washington… 
AJ: Okay. JS: … which is right across the river from Portland, Oregon. AJ: Hmm. The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies 
University of Minnesota Joy Michael Starkey Interview 
JS: Uhm, so Pacific Northwest. And when I was a kid Vancouver, Washington was the place that 
people went, uhm, if Portland was too liberal and/or too expensive for them. AJ: Oh, okay. 
JS: Right. So in some ways it was just a bedroom community, uhm, for people who— AJ: Conservative, poor people. No, I’m just kidding. [Laughs]. JS: [Laughs]. Yeah! Yeah! Uhm, well, it, some of it was just like, some of it was like liberal like folks 
who didn’t have a lot of money. AJ: Sure. JS: And then some of it was really conservative people. AJ: Mhm. JS: So and like Vancouver, Washington has like a lot of history with white supremacists 
organizations. AJ: Oh really? JS: Yeah, yeah, I was told that the KKK used to recruit at my high school. And there was like some 
evidence of that. It’s really frightening. AJ: Oh my god. JS: Yeah and, and like, but it’s white liberal land so no one talks about it. 
AJ: Mhm. JS: So I, where I found growing up in Vancouver to be terrifying, uhm, at least once I was in, uhm, 
high school, uhm, and really had a sense of who I am… 
AJ: Mhm. JS: … uhm, like I, uhm, I tried to start our high school’s first, well we were calling it at the time Gay­ 
Straight Alliance. 
AJ: GSA, uhuh. JS: Yeah, that was the language but in the day. AJ: Sure. JS: Uhm, and that went poorly. 
The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies 
University of Minnesota Joy Michael Starkey Interview AJ: [Laughs]. JS: [Laughs]. Uhm, as, as you can imagine. 
AJ: You, you make it sound like that’s an understatement. I’m getting the impression that, uh… JS: Yeah, yeah, it was, well, like, the white liberal rhetoric is so confusing and strange because 
what… I had a lot of administrators who were trying to help me. 
AJ: Mhm. JS: Uhm, in undergoing this process in ways that did not seem like help to me. AJ: Right. JS: Uhm, and some of them were, some of them were genuinely benign. Like we had a, we had to 
file to, to be a part, to start this organization. Uhm, and, uhm, the principal stepped in and said, 
“You don’t have to take it just to be government,” which, uhm, I said— I thought was 
discrimination… AJ: Mhm. JS: … because everybody else had to go through student government. 
AJ: Sure, exactly. JS: And he eventually had to explain to me, he was like, “No, I know that this will fail if you go 
through student government so I’m stepping in…” 
AJ: Oh, okay. To help… JS: “… to help you.” AJ: To quote, “help.” JS: Right. Right. Uhm, but as you can, like so that was the good side of it. Uhm, but also, uhm, the, 
the not so good side of it is that we put, we put up filers and posters everywhere. AJ: Mhm. JS: Uhm, I was like, I didn’t know at that point to be cautious. Like I was just this… AJ: Right, you were just like, “Yay! Let’s do this.” 
JS: Right. Right! Right. I was, I was a very, I was, I grew up in a family that’s very politically active 
and very like progressive. 
The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies 
University of Minnesota Joy Michael Starkey Interview AJ: Okay. JS: I, I have become much more radical than my, my parents. 
AJ: Mhm. JS: Uhm, but this was normal. Like, like activism was normal. Uhm, but so eventually we, uhm, put 
up all these fliers and they got, they got yanked down. 
AJ: Mmm. JS: As you can imagine. I wasn’t surprised by that. This was, this is like 2000. AJ: Yeah. JS: Yeah, uhm, and, uhm, I, uhm, and eventually the football coach came up to me and introduced 
me to the two football players who apparently had been pulling down these signs. AJ: Ah. JS: And I was just like, why are you introducing me to two people who want to kick my ass? AJ: Right. 
JS: This is unbelievably stupid. AJ: Uhuh. JS: I shouldn’t say that word. AJ: Oh, okay. JS: But it was just, I like, it was just un— like they could not think through my safety in any way. 
Uhm, and it came to, two things like came to a head. Uhm, one was, uhm, that, uhm, I 
happened to be walking through the library and someone that I knew in passing told me that, 
uhm, he had written a paper, uhm, in which he described, uhm, sexually assaulting members of 
the GSA. AJ: Mhm. JS: It was like there’s a GSA so this is my fantasy about how I’m going to respond. AJ: Wow. 
JS: And I immediately found a teacher. The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies 
University of Minnesota Joy Michael Starkey Interview 
AJ: Yeah. JS: And was like, “This is terrifying. I’m scared.” But the school refused to do anything to make me 
feel better or to respond in any way because, uhm, when, when this kid showed me his paper 
very proud of himself… AJ: Mhm. JS: … uhm, he was like, “Oh, what do you think?” I was like, “That’s interesting.” And because I 
hadn’t been like, “That’s horrifying. I’m terrified of you,” like that was using his excuse that I was 
really okay with it. And that nothing needed— there was no response that needed to happen. AJ: Did the instructor that he turned into say anything? JS: I mean, she, she took it to the principal… AJ: Uhuh. JS: … and then it just was like, “Meh, we don’t care.” 
AJ: Fell apart, huh? JS: Yeah, at least that’s my, my recollection of— AJ: Sure. JS: … that’s how I understood it. Uhm, and then I told my dad that this happened and this was mu— 
this was before I was out. AJ: Mhm. JS: Uhm, he was just like, “Well, why, like, what’s the big deal?” AJ: Yeah. 
JS: Yeah, so, uhm, so that was, that was terrifying. AJ: So you, you weren’t quite out to your parents but were you out at school? I mean, if you found 
the GSA people are gonna assume that— 
JS: I, okay so I [laughs], yeah, yeah and my take of like, I was just gonna kind of let them assume… AJ: Yeah. JS: … that like, I was, I never been someone that was very good at being like here are my like my 
declared statements. Everybody just catched on. 
Joy Michael Starkey Interview 
AJ: Uhuh. JS: Like, I’ve, that, I’ve always come out through the backdoors. AJ: Come on guys keep up. JS: Yeah, like, yeah, in, in part because I just can’t, especially as someone who like uses the pronoun 
they, I just can’t take on like trans people, like cis people’s learning process. AJ: Sure. JS: Like, I’m not gonna, I’m not gonna make it easy for them. AJ: Mhm. 
JS: Like they can, they can just tell me about themselves, and I will sit in silent judgement because I 
can’t, I can’t do it for them. AJ: Sure. 
JS: I, I just can’t, uhm, yeah and that kept me from like coming out for a long time because I didn’t 
want to spend my life telling people what my pronouns were. AJ: Sure. 
JS: Like yeah. AJ: So you talked, you talked a little bit about your home environment and your trans sibling and… JS: Yes. Yes. AJ: … your parent, were your parents, uhm, I mean, both in the home? JS: Yeah, yes, so, uhm, my parents, uhm, yeah, uhm, still are married. They still live together. 
They’re happy, as happy as straight people are. AJ: [Laughs]. JS: Uhm, no, I think, I think they’re happy. They’re, uhm, I mean, families are always stranger on the 
inside than… AJ: Yeah. JS: … than, like, I mean, they’re as strange as every other group, right? 
AJ: Sure. Absolutely. 
Joy Michael Starkey Interview 
JS: Yeah, but they’re, uhm, so it’s the four of us, uhm, and, uhm, they still live in the same house— AJ: What was in water? I mean. JS: Oh, man. AJ: Your, your sibling is… JS: I don’t, I don’t know, man. 
AJ: … gender non-conforming… JS: [Laughs]. AJ: … or transgender, I don’t— did they… JS: Yeah, uhm, yeah she’s, you know, I’m not going to speak for her. AJ: Yeah. 
JS: Yeah, I’m not going to speak for her. AJ: Sure. JS: Uhm, but, uhm, yeah so we were on… AJ: She is more identified on the… JS: Uhm, yeah, trans femme spectrum. 
AJ: … binary spectrum? JS: Well, I don’t, I don’t think particularly binary, uhm, necessarily. AJ: But certainly presenting feminine. JS: Yeah. AJ: Yeah, cool. 
JS: Yeah, yeah, she’s, she’s great, uhm, but we were, we were raised, uhm, in this little, this weird 
suburb just slightly differently than everybody else… AJ: Okay. Joy Michael Starkey Interview 
JS: … where my, uhm, my parents were both very, uhm, like working-class white folks who got 
more radicalized and went from being more conser— from conservative family and were much, 
much more liberal. AJ: Uhuh. JS: Uhm… AJ: Than your upbringing. 
JS: Yeah, in part because they both went to, uh, Quaker college. AJ: Oh, okay. JS: Yeah, so they became, they became Quakers. Uhm, and we were, we were raised, we were 
raised Quaker. Uhm, but in the Pacific Northwest Quakers are often fairly Evangelical rather 
than kind of what you find in a lot of the east coast. AJ: Yeah, usually they’re kind of just to themselves and… 
JS: Yeah. AJ: … not really polytheizing. JS: Well and these, like, these are Evangelical Quakers in the sense that they actually can be quite 
conservative. AJ: Mm. JS: So we’ve found our way when I was in middle school out of these kind of more Evangelical, 
conservative meetings to a very, very progressive one that just got kicked out of the rest of… AJ: Oh, okay. JS: … the yearly meeting because of their, their, uhm, LGBT… AJ: Radicalness. JS: Yeah, yeah! It was really about, it was really about LGBT policies. 
AJ: Oh, really? Wow. JS: Yeah. Yeah, so I grew up with these, these very well intentioned white people who were all 
pacifists… 
AJ: Mhm. 
Joy Michael Starkey Interview 
JS: … and had their real limitations. Uhm, particularly around racism. Like, there’s a lot, a lot of folks 
that really believe we are the exceptional white people, and that we were… we’re not like those 
racists over there… AJ: Mhm. JS: … without any like self-reflection… AJ: Wow. 
JS: … about privilege or why like, well why are there no folks of color at this like Quaker meeting. AJ: Mhm. JS: Like we can’t think through that. AJ: [Laughs]. Yeah. JS: That’s too much. And that’s been a, that’s a frustration. 
AJ: Very little introspection, huh? JS: Yeah. Yeah. Uhm, but… AJ: How do you identify culturally? JS: Uhm, I, I am white and I was raised middle class, uhm, and I, uhm, that’s definitely where I come 
from. And I’ve just spent a lot of time in communities where I was not the majority. AJ: Mhm. JS: And, uhm, and, uhm… AJ: That’s helping you become woke if you will. 
JS: [Laughs]. I, I don’t use. Yeah. AJ: I mean your upbringing, sounds like you were pretty progressive and… JS: Yeah. We’ve just been always a little bit more, uhm, I mean, I, I view it as generational change, 
like my parents were not like they’re parents. AJ: Mhm. JS: And I took it a lot further, uhm, trying to like be serious about social justice and social 
movements… 
Joy Michael Starkey Interview 
AJ: Sure. JS: … than my, my parents did. Uhm, and I don’t see myself having children but I teach, and like 
sometimes that’s, that’s the thing that gives me hope is that like over time very, very slowly 
people might like get out from beneath some of these ideas and systems that are really not 
serving us. AJ: Joy, tell me when did you first realize that the gender you were assigned at birth was not quite 
the fit for you? 
JS: You know that’s a really good question because, uhm, I had a sense, I don’t remember ever not 
having a sense that I was gender non-conforming. AJ: Wow. 
JS: Yeah, like I always, but when I was a little kid like I really liked wearing dresses. AJ: Mhm. JS: They’re awesome. AJ: Yeah. JS: They’re fun. 
AJ: Dresses are fun. JS: Yeah, for sure. So I was like, I always was getting in trouble because I would be climbing the 
money bars in a dress. 
AJ: [Laughs]. JS: Yeah and we can’t do that. AJ: Right. JS: Everyone will see your underwear and that’s just apparently a very bad thing. AJ: [Laughs]. Right. 
JS: Yeah. Can’t cope with that one. AJ: No one has ever seen your underwear and probably owns a pair. JS: [Laughs]. I know right? Right? And I was like six. AJ: Yeah. Joy Michael Starkey Interview JS: Like surly we’re all okay here. AJ: Exactly. 
JS: Uhm, but, but so I… uhm, yeah, I had this sense and I, I was a kid, I was like I’m a tomboy. I just 
never had a lot of good words for this and also really had this sense that you couldn’t talk about 
it. That I— and just that I wouldn’t be believed. AJ: Mhm. JS: Uhm, and by the time I was in high school I really had a very strong sense that this was, that, 
uhm, I just didn’t fit into either of these categories. AJ: Hm. JS: Uhm, and thought about transitioning but got freaked out but these articles that were like you 
have to be, like you have to wear a tie and dress like a, like you’re a business man because that’s 
the only way that people won’t think you’re a dyke. Like this is what I remember reading, I 
mean, at… AJ: Wow. JS: I was like, “But I like dykes.” 
AJ: [Laughs]. Right. JS: And I don’t want to wear a tie. [Laughs]. AJ: [Laughs]. JS: I’m like eighteen. That sounds strange… AJ: Yes. 
JS: Uhm, so it really, it really took me like, uhm, finding like concepts like genderqueer and really 
when I had a friend who used the pronoun they I finally was like, “Oh that’s something that 
makes sense to me.” AJ: Mhm. JS: I had been really like… I just didn’t feel like I, I knew, I knew people who used the pronoun ze… AJ: Yeah. 
JS: … back in the day [Laughs]. 
Joy Michael Starkey Interview 
AJ: Mhm. Yeah. JS: Uhm, and I just was struggling with it myself. AJ: Ze never really caught on. JS: No. It just… AJ: Even though it was promoted by Leslie Feinberg… 
JS: I know. AJ: … who was probably one of the most influential transbutch masculine people… JS: Leslie is my favorite. AJ: But ze… JS: Yeah. Yeah. 
AJ: … never like… ze, zir… JS: Yeah, it just, it seemed so othering. AJ: Mhm. JS: Uhm, and I was like, if I struggle with this, I know no one will ever respect it. AJ: [Laughs]. Right. 
JS: Right? Uhm, so it was really, uhm, when I was starting my master’s degree in Women’s and 
Gender Studies that I was like, “Oh, okay. Well here’s a new group of people, uhm, that I can try 
this out, out on… AJ: Sure. JS: … uhm, who maybe won’t, who maybe will believe me. Uhm, and, and then, you know, kind of 
things really shifted, uhm, in the years after that. Partially for me. Uhm, and then also, uhm, like 
culturally we, there’s just a lot more, uhm, trans visibility. 
AJ: Mhm. JS: Uhm, uhm, than there once was, and it felt like there, there was language that made more 
sense, uhm, and… And, you know, there was also like a process for me where I just became felt 
more able to find clothes and ways of being and people that supported me. Uhm, so… AJ: So it’s been an evolutionary process. Joy Michael Starkey Interview JS: Yeah, yeah. And it’s not been in one that really, uhm… you know I think there’s a lot of pressure 
to say like either that like there was a point of transition… AJ: Mhm. JS: … or that I was always like this. AJ: Right. 
JS: And I’ve always been like a lot of different ways. AJ: Sure. [Laughs]. JS: And like coming out has never really been something that made sense to me. AJ: Uhuh. JS: Uhm, like even, even around sexuality. Uhm, like I did come out to my parents, uhm, in a very 
dramatic fashion. AJ: [Laughs]. JS: Uhm, but that went so badly— 
AJ: How? JS: Oh god. It’s a really funny story. AJ: [Laughs]. JS: Uhm, yeah. It was, it was National Coming Out Day. AJ: Okay. 
JS: I was in college. AJ: NCOD. JS: Yeah. I know. AJ: Mhm. JS: Uhm, I just, just started college and for some reason I decided that I want—I was queer. So I had 
to leave home. And I decided to go to Indiana… AJ: Mhm. Joy Michael Starkey Interview JS: … [laughs] of all places. AJ: Wow. 
JS: Yeah, so I went to a Quaker’s school in Indiana… AJ: Uhuh. JS: … for college, and found like… AJ: What’s it called? Do you mind saying? JS: Uhm, Earlham College. Yeah. 
AJ: Earlham? JS: Earlham. AJ: How do you spell that? JS: Uhm, E.R., uhm, E.A.R., uhm, L.H.A.M. AJ: Okay. Earlham College. 
JS: Earlham College. Yeah, so I found like this one like square mile where you could be queer… AJ: [Laughs]. JS: … in Indiana [Laughs]. AJ: Uhuh. [Laughs]. JS: Uhm, and, and survive that experience, and I just didn’t leave. 
AJ: Didn’t leave. Okay. JS: I didn’t leave. Uhm, but everybody was coming out to their parents. AJ: Uhuh. JS: And it was Parent’s Day weekend too and all my friends… AJ: So your parents were there? Joy Michael Starkey Interview 
JS: Yeah! All my friends were, were being cute with their like their family. Half of them had like 
queer family too. I was like, “Well, clearly it’s time.” Cause I felt a lot of— like at that time that 
was how you were. AJ: Right. JS: Like that was the— like come— you had to come out. AJ: Mhm. 
JS: Uhm, and like it had to be a big moment. AJ: [Laughs]. JS: I know, so I, I called. I got all of my friends together. AJ: Mhm. JS: And, uhm, made them stand in the room. We didn’t have cellphones then so we picked up the 
telephone, and I called my parents. AJ: Uhuh. JS: I was like, “Mom, Dad.” And at the time the words that I was using was, “I’m bi.” 
AJ: Okay. JS: Uhm, this is a very different time period. AJ: Yeah, no, I get it. JS: Yeah. Uhm, and, yeah they, they were like. “Okay… alright…” Uhm, and they weren’t hostile but 
my mother is a very verbal processor. AJ: Uhuh. JS: Uhm, and she [laughs], what she said to me was like, “Okay, Joy, but I’m just worried that you’re 
going to marry two people, and then your kids are gonna lose their library books.” My mom’s a 
librarian. A school librarian. 
AJ: [Laughs]. JS: “I just see all of these kids and their parents are divorced and their library books. I worry about 
your children.” 
AJ: [Laughs]. 
Joy Michael Starkey Interview 
JS: So you had to explain like that’s called polyamory. AJ: Right. JS: Right, and it’s not particularly a direction I see myself going in. [Laughs]. AJ: Uhuh. Oh wow. JS: But yeah, and then, and then actually it, it got, it got worse. Uhm, it got worse after that. Uhm, 
because I went home. Uhm, and had kind of a, not realizing— AJ: A month later for Thanksgiving? JS: Right. 
AJ: Six weeks. JS: Yeah. For Christmas. AJ: Okay. JS: Uhm, and I hadn’t really realized that I had set myself up for a really bad situation because my 
friends weren’t there anymore. AJ: Right. JS: Uhm, and my, my mother had six weeks to prepare invasive questions. AJ: [Laughs]. Oh. Wow. 
JS: And it broke down trust… AJ: Mm. JS: … with them completely. Uhm, and I ended up, I ended up basically running away from home 
that summer. Like I left and didn’t really intend to come back. AJ: Wow. JS: And you can imagine like it was very marginally housed… AJ: Mhm. JS: … for a couple of months. Like right on that boarder between homeless and not. 
AJ: Sure. 
Joy Michael Starkey Interview 
JS: Uhm, and that was, that was not good. And there was a partner involved in that. He was also 
not good. Uhm, so, yeah, and that’s, that’s why I kind of am not interested in having a lot of 
interaction with my family around gender and sexuality, even the… AJ: Also still raw. Pretty raw right now. JS: I’m just not over it, especially because when my sister came out, I, my parents thought that 
they, that surely they could come to me, and I would help them understand. AJ: Right. JS: And not, not knowing that I was exactly the wrong person to bring all of their new questions… AJ: Mhm. 
JS: and concerns to because I, I just found them incredibly triggering. AJ: Right. JS: So… AJ: Wow. JS: … yeah, so eventually they’re gonna find out and I’m just letting them, they’ll find out at some 
point. AJ: Okay. JS: Maybe I should— 
AJ: So you don’t go home very often? JS: I don’t go. I go home about once a year. Uhm, and I talk to them a lot. We’re on fairly good 
terms. 
AJ: Cool. JS: But it’s, it’s a very complicated… AJ: Wow. JS: … dynamic. AJ: Yeah. 
JS: Yeah. The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies 
University of Minnesota Joy Michael Starkey Interview 
AJ: What’s your relationship like with your sister? JS: Pretty good. Uhm, pretty good. Uhm, she’s, uhm, she’s a wonderful person. AJ: Mhm. JS: And we always have a lot of fun together. AJ: Is she in college now? 
JS: No, she is, uhm, she’s working on… she actually has some, uhm, she’s had, it is really hard to be 
a trans feminine person. And it’s had some really… I know, I know, you’re shocked. AJ: [Laughs]. Shocked. 
JS: Totally. Uhm, and, so she is, I won’t, I won’t talk for her, but she’s had some really crappy things 
happen to her. AJ: Mhm. I’m sorry. 
JS: Yeah, and it’s had some major medical, uhm, like mental health stuff that’s gone down. AJ: Mhm. I’m so sorry. JS: Yeah. So she, she lives with my parents which I think would just be awful but she’s kind of okay 
with… AJ: Mhm. JS: … uhm, and is trying to make some sort of… AJ: And they’re still in Port--I mean, uhm, Vancouver, Washington. JS: They’re still in Vancouver. Yup. 
AJ: Okay. JS: I know. I know. AJ: Nice. Be careful sis. JS: I know. I just, I, I keep telling her, you know like, the world is awesome when you’re in it and not 
at home with mom and dad… AJ: Mhm. JS: … who are boring in, in the suburbs where everything just seems stifling… Joy Michael Starkey Interview AJ: Yeah. JS: … even though it’s gotten much, much more livable in Vancouver. 
AJ: Okay. JS: It’s gotten… Yeah. AJ: Portland, I’m sure the Portland creep has been steadily coming cause… JS: Yeah. AJ: … it’s super expensive in Portland right now. 
JS: Right, right. So there’s a lot more [laughs] yeah. AJ: [Laughs]. JS: Yeah, the liberalism has expanded a little bit. AJ: Mhm. What challenges have you faced since you began to express your true gender identity? JS: That’s a good question. Uhm, so I, uhm, a lot of, I like being trans. Uh [laughs] but there’s also 
been a lot of things that have been really hard. I, uhm, ended up being, uhm, forced to quite a 
job. AJ: Wow. JS: Yeah, yeah. I was working for a university in their service learning, uhm, I don’t know, you can 
see how I feel about service learning, I mean. AJ: [Laughs]. JS: Their service learning department, uhm, running a scholarship. Uhm, and desperately my 
students and was actually adjuncting for, uhm, for the Peace Studies department, uhm, 
Women’s and Gender Studies department. AJ: Wow. 
JS: Yeah, I was like making real people money. AJ: You were all in, yeah. JS: I was, I was all in, and I loved my work. And I had a boss, uhm, who appeared, uhm, like a year 
into, about a year into this process about having this job. Uhm, and, uhm, she, we thought she 
was gonna be cool. Uhm, she was, she was from a Women’s and Gender Studies program… Joy Michael Starkey Interview AJ: Right. JS: … and she was not cool. Uhm, and I ended up filing… Well I ended up filing a massive like 
discrimination claim against her that was pages and pages and pages and pages of every 
awkward thing she had ever said to me. And she liked to tell people not to use my pronouns. AJ: Wow. JS: Yeah! That was cool. Not cool. Uhm, yeah, yeah and she, but she managed, for some reason 
when I, when I filed this claim they couldn’t find the discrimination. It was like it was hidden 
behind the couch. And what was especially frustrating about the situation, there were actually 
three trans people under her… AJ: Oh wow. JS: … and all of us had had awful experiences… AJ: Uhuh. 
JS: … and ended up leaving. AJ: Wow. JS: Yeah. But we, I mean— AJ: And the university did nothing? JS: No, the university did absolutely nothing. Uhm, I don’t remember if they filed with the university 
but we did have some meetings with like trans lawyers we knew. AJ: Mhm. JS: Uhm, and, you know, I, I was thinking about suing, uhm, mostly because I like I had to quit my 
job. AJ: Yeah. JS: Like I needed some money. Uhm, I’m a prison abolitionist… 
AJ: Right. JS: … but I was not above like getting some, some cash out of this university… AJ: Exactly, yeah. JS: … that’s treated so many people so poorly. Joy Michael Starkey Interview AJ: Mhm. JS: Uhm, but I ended up having a lawyer tell me, “Well are you sure you’re trans?” 
AJ: Mmm. JS: Like because there’s just like no… AJ: There’s no language, no understanding, no… JS: … protection. Yeah. AJ: Yeah. 
JS: Yeah. And it’s— AJ: If you’re non-binary… JS: Right. AJ: … genderqueer or… JS: Right. Right. Uhm, and also the other dynamic of it is that you have to, for all of us, we actually 
have to get fired… AJ: Right. JS: … in order to have legal recourse. 
AJ: And you guys left. JS: Yeah. AJ: Like you felt you were forced to leave. JS: Right. Well and I have, part of what was happening too is that I have a seizure condition… AJ: Mhm. 
JS: … and I was having seizures every time I saw my boss. AJ: Oh my goodness. JS: Right. So my health was just not worth… AJ: Mhm. Joy Michael Starkey Interview JS: … risking. AJ: Yeah, absolutely. 
JS: Yeah, so that was awful. AJ: Yeah. JS: Uhm, and, and then the other thing that’s been hard, uhm, has been, beyond kind of the 
everyday where it’s, it’s hard to be very visible. AJ: Mhm. JS: And a lot of people I think have this attitude, “Well someday you’ll pass, and then you won’t be 
our problem anymore.” AJ: Right. JS: And that’s not gonna be my— AJ: Your reality. JS: Right. 
AJ: Yeah. JS: I, I’m not interested in that. Uhm, that wouldn’t be affirming. Uhm, but also, I, I mean, I’m in 
academia and Women’s and Gender Studies… 
AJ: Mhm. JS: … and that has put me in contact with, uhm, some old school like feminist ideology that’s just 
not always very, uhm… 
AJ: Affirming? JS: Affirming. Yeah. Yeah. Uhm, so I’ve, I’ve always been the only, uhm, like non-binary person in 
the program… 
AJ: Mm. JS: … and, and it feels, like maybe one of the only non-binary person these people are acting like 
they’ve ever known. 
AJ: Wow. 
Joy Michael Starkey Interview 
JS: Right. So that’s, that’s like, on the one hand I think it’s really exciting to be a part of, like trans 
people creating our own scholarship about ourselves. AJ: Mhm. 
JS: Let there’s a desperate need for that. And I have— I always have trans students… AJ: Mhm. JS: … that are really wonderful and did a bunch of trans student activism that was fun. Uhm, and, 
and value, well we did a lot of trans coalitional work around Palestine actually. AJ: Hm. JS: When I was getting my master’s degree, that was really cool. AJ: There are trans people in Palestine? JS: [Laughs]. Yeah! Just like everywhere! 
AJ: [Laughs]. JS: Yeah, uhm, but on the other hand it’s really hard to just be on these, these academic spaces… AJ: Mhm. JS: … that have no… no room for non-binary folks and for trans feminine folks. Uhm, usually a few 
more trans guys get through the door… AJ: Mm. Yeah. JS: But it’s not easy for them either. AJ: No, it’s not, it’s not easy but it’s something that I’ve been trying to get at in these 
conversations… JS: Yeah. AJ: … that I’ve been having, particularly, uhm, with sort of trans masculine identified folks. 
JS: Yeah. AJ: Uhm, and that is, this is just my own sort of… perception but, rooted in some reality… JS: Mhm. 
Joy Michael Starkey Interview 
AJ: … that historically trans men sort of come out of a more politized, lesbian or women, feminist 
environment… JS: Mhm. 
AJ: … so they sort of have that language… JS: Mhm, mhm. AJ: … uhm, and, and sort of have the capacity to, uhm, articulate that in a way that, that resonates… JS: Right. AJ: … and so consequently they— it seems like there’s more acceptance, particularly in academia 
or… JS: Yeah. AJ: … uhm, or sort of other intellectual kind of pursuits. 
JS: Mhm. AJ: Whereas trans women… you know, and, and it, and it shifts and varies too cause black women, 
black trans women sort of come out of drag culture. [Laughs]. 
JS: Mhm, mhm. AJ: And, and white trans women tend to come out of middle class… JS: Middle class respectability. AJ: Middle class respectability, white male privilege. JS: Yeah. 
AJ: Uhm, is that something that you’ve experienced or that you think about or anything? JS: Yeah! This is stuff that I think about all the time. AJ: Mhm. JS: Uhm, yeah, I think that, I think there are a few things and part of the this is like what I’m 
interested in in research. AJ: Mhm. 
Joy Michael Starkey Interview 
JS: There are a few things that stand out to me like one is, uhm, one is that we just have hidden 
away all the stories about trans, uhm, trans women who were lesbians and who were feminists. AJ: Right. 
JS: Like those, like even though all those people were involved in all of these movements. I mean 
they have to be involved to get kicked out. AJ: Right. Exactly. Yes. 
JS: [Laughs]. But somehow like people either couldn’t keep records or no one’s reading them. AJ: Mhm. JS: Uhm, so you kind of have this, uhm, this like dearth of those voices and people were so heavily 
policed and like the— I think the rhetoric you see is that, uhm, that like trans, trans men could 
be saved, like trans men could just realize that they bought too much into patriarchy… AJ: Mhm. 
JS: … and that they need to like… AJ: They can be pulled back, yeah. JS: They can be pulled back, yeah. And they can— we’re losing all of our butches… AJ: Uhuh. JS: Like that ridiculous rhetoric… 
AJ: Right. JS: … even though we are losing butch culture. AJ: Uhuh. JS: And there is something sad about butch culture… AJ: Yeah. 
JS: … but also there’s a big positive about losing some of that. AJ: Something positive because so many more femmes are now… JS: Yeah. AJ: … asserting themselves, partnering with other femmes, and, yeah. Joy Michael Starkey Interview JS: Yup, yup. AJ: Whereas that, you know, in the ‘70s and ‘80s… 
JS: Yeah. AJ: … you know, it wasn’t as, you know, you identified lesbians as boot wearing… JS: Right. AJ: … motorcycle riding… JS: But some of it is that I think that it’s a loss of working class queer identity. 
AJ: Hm. JS: Like that’s, that’s kind of my theory… AJ: That’s interesting. JS: … that some of it is that you see, like, like Leslie Fienberg’s book like thinking about all these 
bars that shut down… AJ: Yeah. Right. JS: … all the jobs shut down and people end up going to New York City and really not having any, 
any kind of sense of community any longer. AJ: Right. Yeah. JS: I think some— AJ: You’re talking about Stone Butch Blues. 
JS: Yeah, yeah. I think some of that was, I think some of that happened nationally. AJ: Oh, yeah. I’m sure. Absolutely. JS: Yeah. But it’s hard, it’s hard to know, I mean, and I think working class queer identities have just 
become a lot less visible. Like we went from hypervisibility… AJ: Right. JS: … to, to really like all these middle-class folks in academia like me. AJ: Mhm. Yeah. Joy Michael Starkey Interview JS: You apparently are the face of whatever even though— AJ: And corporate, I mean. 
JS: Yeah, like all these HRC’s. AJ: Corporate queer identity is huge, right? JS: Right. AJ: You know you think of, uh, a lesbian now, she’s a vice president at, you know… JS: Yup. 
AJ: … some Fortune 500 company. JS: Yeah. And I’m supposed to be excited that my bank is going to give me credit card with, like, two 
men, white men holding hands. 
AJ: [Laughs]. Right. JS: I’m supposed to be thrilled. Yeah, and all these pride parades, trans people only go when we’re 
going to shut them down. 
AJ: Right. Exactly. JS: Like they’re just not for us. AJ: Yeah, no. They, they are not. Absolutely. JS: But I do think, going back to what you were saying, I think that the big piece for me is like the 
trans misogyny. It’s like we could save butch people… AJ: Mhm. JS: … uhm, but like, I think, the, the rhetoric out of radical feminists and out of police was all of 
those trans femmes are lying, and they’re inherently deceptive and they’re criminal and they’re 
sexual predators. 
AJ: Wow. JS: That’s, that’s what we see historically. AJ: Mhm. JS: Uhm, and that— Joy Michael Starkey Interview AJ: It’s the whole thing behind the whole bathroom… JS: Exactly. 
AJ: Right. JS: Exactly. And yet we can’t… AJ: Although there’s never been really any documented cases of trans femme violence in 
bathrooms. JS: No. AJ: It’s mostly hetero or… I don’t know what they’re sexuality is but cisgender white men who… JS: Well it’s mostly us getting attacked in bathrooms. AJ: Well, yes. 
JS: And, and like I think part of the problem is that people, women are, like white women are 
talking about rape only in terms of, or the, the rape culture I should say cause white women 
have pushed back on this but the rape culture like view of rape is that you’re gonna get raped in 
the bathroom or walking down the street. 
AJ: Mhm. JS: Not, like it’s, it’s more likely to be someone you know. AJ: In your home. Yeah. JS: Yeah. So… AJ: Or in someone else’s home, yeah. 
JS: Yeah. Yes. I think those things combine to this absolutely absurd conversation about the 
bathroom. AJ: Mhm. 
JS: Uhm, which often non-binary people don’t get represented in at all. AJ: I know. How do we get to a resolution around that? JS: I don’t know because I really think we need trans femmes who are the most impacted by this… AJ: Mhm. Joy Michael Starkey Interview JS: … to be at the forefront but there’s a lot of this no— non-binary people have to start talking 
with each other about— and organizing together to try to get a sense of what we do have in 
common, what we don’t, and how we want to engage with this. 
AJ: Yeah, cause a lot of trans femmes I think feel like, I don’t want to necessarily take up the non­ 
binary issue… JS: Mhm. 
AJ: … because then somehow that may negate my own existence… JS: Mhm. Yeah, and you know there are— AJ: … which is very complicated and nuanced. JS: Right, and there are a lot of, there have been a lot of queer spaces where people who are 
assigned female at birth have a lot of privilege over trans femmes in particular. AJ: Mhm. JS: Uhm, and, yeah, but there’s also not a lot of like those are spaces where I have like masculinity 
projected onto me… AJ: Mhm. JS: … that I don’t identify with and try to find ways to push back against. And also where it’s not like 
people find like someone who like I am not attractive in those spaces. AJ: [Laughs]. JS: Like honestly. Like, like those are really sexualized like skinny andro like androgynous girls are 
desirable. And, and certain like sort of trans masculinity is desirable. AJ: Mhm. JS: and there need— we don’t have a lot of conversation that has a lot of depth to talking about the 
rest of us and how we relate to each other, what privileges we do have, and, and the ways in 
which we are like— complex ways in which non-binary people experience… [Sighs]. 
AJ: Well, I wanna hear a little bit of your ideas around, uhm, medical intervention. JS: Yeah. AJ: And if you, you know, so I’m gonna ask the question… JS: Sure. Joy Michael Starkey Interview 
1 AJ: JS: … but, to the extent that you feel comfortable… Mhm. 
6 AJ: JS: AJ: JS: AJ: … please only… Yeah. … answer or not answer to that extent. So have you undergone any medical interventions… No, and— … and do you have any intention? 
16 JS: AJ: JS: AJ: JS: Yeah, no. And I never had any desire to do so. Mhm. Okay. I certainly thought about it… Mhm. … because that’s, that was the script that was handed to me… 
26 AJ: JS: AJ: JS: AJ: Sure. … is like, oh, okay… Go get your hormones. Go get some testosterone. Yeah. You’ll be fine. 
36 JS: AJ: Right. And, uhm, and especially when I was considering it, uhm, the only, the only model I saw was, “You need… go become a man.” Mhm. 
41 JS: AJ: Not like… you could, not the kind of informed consent model that exists where some people just like, “Yeah, well I’m just gonna like…” Mhm. 
46 JS: “… get a little bit of T for a while.” Joy Michael Starkey Interview 
AJ: Right. Exactly. JS: Right? That was not a part of my world. Uhm, and, uhm, I, now I’m really more rooted in how 
much I’m not interested in that. In part because of, uhm, feeling, uhm, like I want to have, like 
there’s a way to be non-binary that doesn’t rely on, on masculinity. AJ: Mhm. JS: And I certainly did not always feel that way. I, I really felt like I had to be really butch. 
AJ: Mhm, mhm. JS: And, and that didn’t sit well with me. AJ: Right. JS: Uhm, yeah, and so now I’m more interested in, in how, how can I figure out how to be a more 
integrated person that gets to be my whole self. AJ: Sure. JS: And that’s not, that’s not easy for any of us. And it doesn’t— it’s taken me being really 
comfortable with the fact that people won’t read me the way I want them to. AJ: Mhm. JS: And I can’t make them do— I, I can’t, I can’t let those people like determine whether or not I 
feel successful as a person. AJ: Sure. I mean, no, you, you just can’t, right? JS: Yeah. Yeah. AJ: How do you deal with the restroom issue? 
JS: You know, it is, it is a drama. So I don’t know how I’ve managed to not be like confronted in the 
bathroom but it’s, it’s yet, I’ve yet to— AJ: But you haven’t been? 
JS: It hasn’t happened. AJ: Yay! JS: Thank god, right? AJ: Right. Joy Michael Starkey Interview JS: Uhm, yeah, uhm, mostly, uhm, I try to find gender neutral bathrooms and try to pee at home. Or 
find like single stall… AJ: Single stall… JS: … uhm, yeah, and I was, part of the drama with, uhm, where I’m, I’m going to school in Ohio 
State now, and there’s like eight bathrooms, eight gender neutral bathrooms on this campus… AJ: Wow. JS: … for like sixty thousand people so I never get to pee. AJ: [Laughs]. I’m sorry. 
JS: It’s so bad. It’s so bad. There’s one that I sometimes use… AJ: Uhuh. JS: … but usually I like go to the Women’s and Gender Studies bathroom… AJ: Mhm. JS: … where I’m like, “Okay, so it’s a women’s bathroom but none of these people are likely to, to 
beat me up in here. AJ: Right. JS: I just feel, I feel awkward… 
AJ: Yeah. JS: … but I would feel more awkward in the men’s room. The, the only ugly experiences I’ve had 
have been with family bathrooms and family locker rooms. 
AJ: Really? JS: Yeah, because sometimes people get very into the family aspect of it. AJ: What’s a family bathroom? JS: Okay, so you know some— AJ: I think of them as single stall. 
JS: Yea— yeah but if you notice some of them will say like family on them… 
Joy Michael Starkey Interview 
AJ: Mhm. JS: … which is, is just them saying that it’s like there’s, there’s a changing table in there. AJ: Right. Exactly. JS: But some people and, and sometimes they have family lockers… AJ: Okay. 
JS: … uhm, where, which makes more sense, like okay… AJ: Yeah. JS: … it’s you and your kids. AJ: Your kids going into the locker room. JS: Right. Right. Well I was, I was trying to, I was trying to use, use the locker room, uhm, and I, I 
heard there was a family locker room, and I was like awesome. I can go… AJ: Okay. JS: … and not like… 
AJ: Disrupt things. JS: Right! Uhm, and I, I walked in and, and there was like somebody was like, “Come on in!” And I 
was like it’s you and your kids. And I got the weirdest looks cause I don’t have any kids with me. 
AJ: Okay. JS: So they were like, “What are you doing here?” AJ: Right. JS: And sometimes people just don’t know how to read me at all. AJ: Mhm. 
JS: And they’re like, “Well, okay, you’re a woman but you’re telling me you’re trans. So are you a 
trans woman or are you just a freak? Are you lying? Are you weird?” AJ: Mhm. 
JS: Uhm, and I just saw all of those things on these people’s faces, and I’m like I will never go into a 
family locker room ever again. Joy Michael Starkey Interview AJ: Awe. Wow. JS: Yeah. Uhm, yeah. So… 
AJ: What’s dating like? JS: It’s [laughs]. It’s not good. It’s not good. Uhm, partially because dating is a cesspool for 
everybody right? 
AJ: Yes. JS: [Laughs]. AJ: Yes. [Laughs]. JS: Yeah, uhm, I, I find it really, really hard because either people, either you tell people up front 
that you’re trans, and I have to like because, because otherwise they won’t, they won’t respect 
me… 
AJ: Sure. JS: … like know what my pronouns are. Uhm, uhm so you, you do that and people either like, “I 
don’t know what that is so I’m going to have nothing to do with it. Or you get, uhm, like queer 
folks, uhm, who are cool with it, uhm, and, uhm, I’ve certainly been like, been out with people 
that were fine. Uhm, or like really supportive but often I feel like people really project some sort 
of masculinity onto me… AJ: Mhm. 
JS: … that I don’t identify with. AJ: Okay. JS: I like really identify like in the middle… AJ: Sure. JS: … or outside of this. 
AJ: Mhm. JS: And I really don’t think that I’m… certainly in dating relationships running around acting 
particularly masculine. 
AJ: Yeah. 
Joy Michael Starkey Interview 
JS: But people are like, “Oh, so you’re gonna initiate all this.” And I’m like, “Have you met me?” AJ: Right. [Laughs]. No. JS: And I have not figured out a way out of that dynamic, and also it’s just like, uh, it just depresses 
me. AJ: Oh. JS: I know. AJ: Yeah. So no relationship currently then? JS: Nope, no. 
AJ: Mhm. JS: No. AJ: Wow. JS: [Laughs]. AJ: Uhm, what do you think the relationship is, and you’ve kind of hit on this a little bit, and, but 
maybe before I ask you that, I should at least let you talk about what are some of the positive 
aspects of, uh… JS: [Laughs]. AJ: … being gender non-conforming. JS: Sure. Uhm, I mean, there’s so much about it that I really love. Uhm, like one thing that’s, I still 
think about, uhm, even though it’s been, like, this have been me for like six or seven years. Uhm, 
it’s just, it feels, it feels like magic. It’s like people actually like, I realized this thing about myself 
and like and it wasn’t a big effort to, to suddenly be like, “Oh yeah, you look pretty, you look 
really gender non-conforming.” I, I remember as a kid just thinking just like, “I got boobs. No— 
everyone will always see that I’m a girl.” AJ: Right. 
JS: And I have people who have no idea what my gender is… AJ: Sure. JS: … all the time. AJ: Yeah. Joy Michael Starkey Interview JS: All the time. Uhm, and then also I have a lot of cis people who don’t believe me when I tell them 
that. I know, it’s very, very strange. AJ: Wow. JS: I definitely— people tell me a lot more about themselves than they, they are telling me about 
me. That’s what I’ve come to the conclusion. So that’s still pretty like amazing. Uhm, and I, I 
think that a lot of trans people I both struggle with the community, uhm, because it can be a 
really small community. AJ: Mhm. JS: And it can be a very… a community that like I, I’ve run into very politized trans circles. 
AJ: Sure. JS: And it can kind of be like— AJ: Aren’t most of them? JS: I know right? That’s like, yeah. They are. AJ: Yeah. 
JS: And it can kind of feel like, it’s like, “Okay, well you better make sure, you better not mess up.” AJ: Mhm. JS: And that can be, that can be just tiring. AJ: For sure. Tiring. Exhausting. JS: Yeah, and it’s just like, “Wow, this isn’t fun. I’m here to not mess up…” 
AJ: Right. JS: “… instead of here to like connect with other people.” AJ: Mhm. JS: Uhm, yeah. Uhm, but I, I have a lot of trans friends that I love, uhm, very deeply. Uhm, I have 
really enjoyed, uhm, uhm, doing a lot of activism that’s been, uhm, related, uhm, to trans 
struggles in various ways. 
AJ: So what kind of… have you been a part of organizations? 
Joy Michael Starkey Interview 
JS: Yeah! Yeah, I’m a part of Black and Pink. Are you? AJ: Oh really? JS: Yeah. Oh yeah. Black and Pink. [Laughs]. AJ: Prison abolition. JS: Yup! Yup. Uhm, I’ve kind of been on… 
AJ: So you maybe know CeCe McDonald? JS: I met CeCe. She gave me a hug. That was really nice. [Laughs]. AJ: [Laughs]. Yeah. JS: She’s a like— AJ: She extols the virtues of Black and Pink. Yeah. 
JS: Yeah. Yeah. She’s, she’s amazing. Uhm, we’re lucky, we just don’t have her with us. AJ: Yeah, absolutely. JS: Uhm, yeah. Yeah, I’ve been a part— AJ: And thank you Leslie Feinberg for your work in making it an international call celeb. JS: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Uhm, yeah, and like I… 
AJ: So you’ve been involved in Black and Pink. JS: Mhm. Yeah and I think… AJ: Started the GSA at your high school. JS: [Laughs]. Uh, yeah. Yeah, the, the, what actually killed the GSA in the very end was that the 
resource cop is what they used to call cops and police… AJ: Sure. JS: … in, in schools, showed up at our first meeting. AJ: Mhm. 
JS: And I was like, “I’m done.” I was, I was where like, I was just like, “Why the hell are you here?” The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies 
University of Minnesota Joy Michael Starkey Interview 
AJ: Right. JS: “You’re terrifying.” AJ: Wow. JS: And that was when I realized that these people are just gonna drop in on us on our spaces. AJ: Mhm. 
JS: And, and I was just like, this like, little teenager who was scared of this whole thing. I was like, 
“I’m done.” AJ: Wow. 
JS: I couldn’t do it anymore. So [laughs]. AJ: So that’s disbanded. JS: Yeah, yeah, yeah. It just kind of flopped. AJ: Wow. JS: But I learned a lot from that. 
AJ: Yeah. [Laughs]. JS: Uhm, I also, so I’ve been doing, most of my activism, uhm, for many years has been around 
Palestine. 
AJ: Mm. JS: Uhm, yeah. And I’ve been involved in like anti-pink washing activism… AJ: Mhm. Sure. JS: … uhm, and research for a really long time. AJ: Okay. 
JS: Yeah, and then I’ve also just been like lucky in Chicago to know a lot of folks who have done 
some really amazing stuff around police violence and around, uhm, like Blackout Pride. AJ: Right. 
JS: Yeah. Yeah. The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies 
University of Minnesota Joy Michael Starkey Interview 
AJ: Die ins and shutdowns and… JS: Mhm, mhm. AJ: Wow, you know one other thing, you mentioned this phrase, trans misogyny. JS: Mhm. AJ: You know, I personally know but this video may be viewed by… 
JS: Sure. AJ: … more than just me hopefully. JS: [Laughs]. AJ: Uhm, they may not be aware of what trans misogyny is. Can you talk a little bit about that topic? JS: Yeah, and it’s good to have like a snapshot of how we’re understanding it or at least how I’m 
understanding it. AJ: Right, at the moment, yeah. Mhm. JS: Yeah, so I think, uhm, I do a lot of teaching, uhm, about, uhm, yeah, I’ve taught, uhm, college 
kids for a few years now. AJ: Okay. JS: Uhm, and, uhm, this for me is like the one thing that I really want them all to understand. Uhm, 
it’s kind of like okay. Uhm, Julia Serano, uhm, was one of the first people to articulate the idea of 
trans misogyny, uhm, and it’s the— AJ: Whipping Girl. JS: Right! Right. I remember when we were all talking about Whipping Girl and LiveJournal. AJ: [Laughs]. Yeah. JS: [Laughs]. That’s what I remember. 
AJ: Oh, okay. JS: Yeah. AJ: I don’t even know what LiveJournal is but… JS: This was the, this was my generation’s… Joy Michael Starkey Interview AJ: I think we’re a little generationally, uh... JS: Yeah. That was our like social movement— social media platform… 
AJ: Okay, alright. JS: … was these longform journals. AJ: Oh, wow. JS: Yeah, and they were a hotbed of trans thinking. AJ: Okay. 
JS: Like that’s where we all talked about ourselves endlessly. AJ: Uhuh. Wow. JS: Yeah, it was, it was great. I miss LiveJournal. Uhm, someone should do research on trans 
communities on LiveJournal. Uhm. [Laughs]. AJ: Yeah, that would be fascinating. JS: Yeah. AJ: Maybe you should do it. JS: Maybe. [Laughs]. Uhm, anyway, uhm, so, yeah Julia Serano came up with this, this term that 
people have been talking about for a long time… AJ: Mhm. JS: ... uhm, where it’s, uhm, the intersection between transphobia and misogyny. So, uhm, trying to 
like to give a voice to the kind of specificities of like state violence and cultural hate, uhm, uhm, 
against trans femme, feminine people. Uhm, and try to like talk about, uhm, how, how kind of 
these things we’ve been, these dynamics… AJ: Mhm. 
JS: … around, uhm, around transphobia are different, uhm, when, uhm, you’re— we’re also talking 
about the way that femininity is just devalued so trans femininity, of course, is just radically 
pathologized… AJ: Right. Mhm. 
Joy Michael Starkey Interview 
JS: … uhm, yeah, I think, and I think it’s a really, really important concept, uhm, for, for people, for 
kind of the, the political work to be engaged… AJ: Right. 
JS: … and kind of understanding that this is what’s going on and taking it further to talk about like 
when like people are using the phrase, uhm, trans misogynoir, so like... yeah. AJ: Yeah, so trans misogyny against black women, right? 
JS: Right, right, which is really specific. AJ: Very specific and very real. JS: Very, very real. Very real. And there’s a lot of like, people, for someone like me to talk about 
transphobia, like I think there’s a way in which sometimes we, uhm, are trying to convince 
people that it’s real and that it’s bad… AJ: Mhm. 
JS: … and that it’s devastating, uhm, and sometimes people do, it’s like well think about all the 
people who are murdered? Well the people who are being murdered aren’t me. They aren’t 
looking like me. AJ: Mhm. JS: They’re overwhelmingly black women. AJ: Mhm. 
JS: And we need to find ways to talk about that. And also to, to still do like more thinking about— AJ: Fifteen trans women of color have been murdered… JS: Yeah. AJ: … this year alone. JS: Yeah. I think there was just another one that— another name that came out today. 
AJ: The fifteenth person. JS: Was it? Oh, shit. AJ: Yeah. JS: Wow. Joy Michael Starkey Interview 
1 AJ: JS: Very sad. That’s really bad. 
6 AJ: JS: How do you— do, can, so, I was gonna ask this question, what is the relationship between LGB and the T? [Laughs]. 
11 AJ: JS: AJ: JS: AJ: JS: AJ: I’m gonna nuance it up a bit more, uhm, can LGB folks be trans misogynistic? Yeah. Yeah. They’re— Are they? Often. Almost all the time. Uhm, yeah, and, like some of that is historically, like we’ve seen like, like, uhm, Jean O'Leary… Mhm. Who? … yelling at… Jean O'Leary? Uhm, in 1973 Jean O'Leary, uhm, was a radical feminist— Jean O'Leary? 
26 JS: AJ: JS: AJ: JS: Yeah. Yeah. Okay. She was a radical feminist in New York, and, uhm, after Sylvia Rivera gave that amazing speech… Mhm. … she… 
36 AJ: JS: AJ: JS: AJ: At Pride? Yeah. Yeah. At Pride. At Christopher St. She got up and, uhm, misgendered Sylvia. Mhm. Uhm, and said that like terrible things about her. Sure. Yeah. 
46 JS: And what a lot of people don’t realize— Joy Michael Starkey Interview 
AJ: I tried to block out her name I guess. JS: Yeah, yeah, yeah, it’s, it’s really, and, and then Marsha saved Sylvia’s life. AJ: Mhm. JS: Uhm, after Sylvia like tried to kill herself… AJ: Right. 
JS: … uhm, because of what— and nobody is acknowledging that Jean did that to Sylvia. AJ: Mhm. JS: No like it’s not in the history books. AJ: Wow. JS: It, it, like, I wrote it on Wikipedia because I was mad… 
AJ: Okay. JS: … that nobody [laughs]… AJ: [Laughs]. JS: … knew about it. AJ: Well, it’s in your video now. [Laughs]. 
JS: [Laughs]. Yes. Jean O'Leary, everybody. AJ: Jean O'Leary. JS: Uhm, yeah, Jean O'Leary. Uhm, so we— there’s this whole history of LGBT people, uhm, like, 
like, on, on personal level, I’ve seen trans, uhm, women, and femmes I know just have awful 
experiences, uhm, and, uhm, from, from queer folks. AJ: Mhm. 
JS: Uhm, like, I certainly have seen that go down in classrooms, uhm, where people just had really 
struggled to finish their degree. AJ: Mhm. 
JS: Uhm, because, because they were always being treated like they were too emotional, too 
excessive, asking too much… Joy Michael Starkey Interview AJ: Too angry. JS: … too angry. Yeah. Uhm, yeah, and then. And then we have like all of these, like a long history 
of, uhm, trans women, especially trans women of color, getting up and saying something, uhm, 
and then… AJ: Mhm. JS: … being booed by cro— by crowds of gay folks. Like Jennicet Gutierrez… AJ: That’s a very good friend of mine, yes. JS: Yeah, yeah, uhm, yeah, like there’s that whole, I mean, and some of it is a, it’s like— 
AJ: Sylvia, I mean, well, you named it, but yeah. It’s a long history. JS: Sylvia, yeah. It’s a long, long history. Uhm, and some of it is that people like, we have to think 
about it’s like trans women were resisting, and that’s the response to resistance. 
AJ: Right. JS: But also it just takes, it’s, it happens when trans women are just like, being, being people. AJ: Right. JS: Like, it, it’s nasty. It’s really, really nasty. AJ: Wow. Uhm, what do you think the agenda for the trans community should be going forward? 
JS: Oh, man. AJ: And, when you, when I say trans community, I am including GNC… JS: Mhm, mhm. AJ: … folks into that. JS: Yeah. Well, I’ll say two things. Uhm, I think that like for like non-binary GNC folks, we need to 
like have an agenda just to talk with each other… AJ: Mm. JS: … about, what, how are we the same, how are we different, uhm, cause there are a lot of 
people who are using the pronoun “they” now who don’t even identify as, as trans. Maybe 
they’re GNC but they’re not trans. And if you, like, I don’t know what that means. 
Joy Michael Starkey Interview 
AJ: Yeah, no, I know a person who doesn’t identify under any of the queer labels but… JS: Yeah. AJ: … they use they/them pronouns. JS: Right, and I know some people who are very thoughtful in that. AJ: Almost in like an ally kind of way. Yeah. 
JS: Yeah, uhm, I do know some people like I have some people I’m very close with, uhm, I have no 
friend I’m very close with who’s very thoughtful. Uhm, prefers the pronoun they but identifies 
as cis and for them it’s about racism. It’s like, okay, well, well, like, uhm, it’s about being a black 
woman but that means you’re not really a woman. So they’re trying to figure out a way to 
navigate that reality. Uhm, but I won’t speak for them. AJ: Yeah. JS: Right? Uhm, and I think that there’s some thoughtful work that’s emerging. Uhm, but we’re at, 
at— it’s also like we’re in this, this moment where the media is like screaming about trans stuff… AJ: Right. JS: … all the time… 
AJ: Mhm. JS: … in ways that just can be very distracting for all of us because it feels like it might be good, it 
might be bad. 
AJ: Sure. JS: So I think we have to talk with each other. Uhm, but also, I think, our larger agenda has to be 
around like prison abolition… 
AJ: Mhm. JS: … state violence like… AJ: Wow. JS: Like, uhm, and health care. Period. AJ: Mhm. 
JS: Surviving this Trump administration is gonna be… immigration, uhm, finding ways for it not to be 
about visibility. Joy Michael Starkey Interview AJ: Yeah. JS: Because some of us— like I’m very visible. 
AJ: Mhm. JS: And it’s not, it’s not something that… my visibility hasn’t gotten me more food or a job. AJ: [Laughs]. Yeah. JS: Like and I don’t know why we all think that visibility is a political good. AJ: Mhm. 
JS: And I’m certainly a part of a lot of communities that don’t believe that. AJ: Right. JS: But we’re not really being listened to necessarily. [Laughs]. AJ: [Signs]. Well, well, you know, uhm, it’s interesting. This is not an endorsement at all. JS: Mhm. 
AJ: But, uhm, I think Caitlin Jenner is probably done more to put the word transgender on people’s 
mouths than… JS: Yeah, yeah. 
AJ: … than anybody. JS: Right. Well, and you know, I have a complicated relationship with Caitlin Jenner like I think most 
of us do where, uhm, she always… she’s come to suck all the air out of the room. 
AJ: Mhm. JS: Like whenever my students talk about trans people the only one they know to talk about is 
Caitlin Jenner. 
AJ: Right. Sure. JS: And, just a year, like a couple years ago, it was Janet Mock and Laverne Cox… AJ: Uhuh. Right. JS: … and CeCe were the only people they knew. And those were like, that’s a very different… Joy Michael Starkey Interview 
1 AJ: JS: Andrea Jenkins wasn’t one of those? [Laughs]. Sorry. 
6 AJ: JS: AJ: JS: AJ: I’m kidding. [Laughs]. [Laughs]. Not yet. We’ll work on that. Okay. 
16 JS: AJ: Uhm, but, but I mean I think a lot of us want to have some compassion for her because people forget that she was outed. Right. 
21 JS: AJ: JS: AJ: JS: AJ: JS: Like I don’t think she, she tried to do this, but her politics are awful. They’re awful. And she doesn’t want to be— I have some sympathy for her just because I know how challenging it was for me to live a sort of divided life for twenty-nine years. Yeah. I can’t imagine doing it for sixty-five. In the public eye. 
36 AJ: JS: AJ: JS: AJ: Yeah. Yeah. But like I find it, I find it interesting to think— But her politics are completely… Crap. … out of this world. 
46 JS: Yeah. Joy Michael Starkey Interview 
1 AJ: JS: AJ: JS: AJ: Insane. Yeah, she doesn’t have a reasonable assessment of how this world works. Or her politics are about upholding like white supremacy. Yes. And corporate dominance. 
11 JS: AJ: Exactly. Exactly. I mean, her surprise over Donald Trump kind of reflects a lack of judgement but everything else about her is like no, you, she’s exactly who, who she… Yeah. 
16 JS: AJ: JS: AJ: JS: … would be… Exactly. … if like she were a cis white woman with all that money. Right. Yeah. Like she’s not a surprise. 
26 AJ: JS: AJ: JS: AJ: No. Uhm, but, but it is interesting to me to think about like people like Renee Richards. Mhm. Uhm, who, like, I’m, I’m trying to remember the last names, but she was that... Yeah. 
36 JS: AJ: JS: AJ: JS: … tennis player, right? The tennis player, yeah. Doctor Renee Richards. Yeah! Yeah. Uhm, who certainly had like, as far as I know, better politics than Caitlin Jenner. 
46 AJ: Mm… Joy Michael Starkey Interview 
JS: But… oh, but— AJ: [Laughs]. JS: Yeah. It’s, it, maybe not, at the same time, but we’ve had— AJ: Well, she’s very deeply binary. JS: Yeah, yeah. 
AJ: Uhm, which to each his own, I mean, life is… JS: Yeah. AJ: … but she kind of states it as that’s the only way… JS: Right. AJ: … to be… 
JS: Right. AJ: … which is problematic. JS: Right. Right. But she, I think she’s interesting because she points to how the media has been 
obsessed with like trans women who are athletes for a while because I think… AJ: Mhm. Yeah. JS: … it’s like famous people, and I think that for some like— it reminds me of Chris— uhm, uhm, 
Christine Jorgensen too… AJ: Mhm. JS: … where it’s like, oh, well, one is in the military… AJ: Right. JS: … doing this hyper masculine thing. 
AJ: Mhm. JS: So now it’s like so fascinating. AJ: Right. JS: Like it’s the same rhetoric. Like Caitlin Jenner, there’s a whole history. Like she’s not new. 
The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies 
University of Minnesota Joy Michael Starkey Interview 
1 AJ: JS: AJ: JS: And, I mean, you know, I can speak from experience that, you know, in an effort to try to conform I pursued sort of hyper masculine activities… Yeah. … to throw off the sin if you will or [laughs]… Yeah. 
11 AJ: JS: AJ: JS: AJ: But really more so to try to conform, and it just… Mhm, mhm. … was not to be. Yeah. This is not about me. This is not about you, Joy. 
21 JS: AJ: [Laughs]. So, uhm, I’m getting down to sort of the last question, and I guess that is like where do you see the trans, non-binary, GNC community fifty years from now. 
26 JS: AJ: JS: AJ: JS: Oh wow. Just pick up your crystal ball and make some predictions. [Laughs]. Well I hope our plant is like a habitable… Still here? … place. Yeah! 
36 AJ: JS: AJ: JS: AJ: [Laughs]. Oh my goodness. Well actually the planet will still be here. Right. We might not be. We might not. 
46 JS: [Laughs]. Or there might not be as many of us as there are. Joy Michael Starkey Interview 
AJ: Yeah. JS: Uhm, hm, you know, I really feel like, I don’t even, I don’t know because I could certain— there 
have been really big changes in my lifetime that I never imagined. 
AJ: Mhm. Yeah. JS: Uhm, and my students, uhm, are, have this very different experience, uhm, of being trans, uhm, 
than I have. And they’re just like ten years younger than me. 
AJ: Mhm. JS: Uhm, I really hope that, uhm, we figured out a way to, uhm, have a more complicated 
understanding of gender that has more space for like non-binary and agender and gender fluid 
and gender queer. AJ: And even cisgender. Right? JS: Yeah. Yeah. 
AJ: Like that’s a gender. JS: Right! Right and they clearly have some shit to work on. AJ: Right. JS: [Laughs]. Like, they clearly have questions… AJ: Yes. 
JS: … uhm, and a lot of their relationship with us is they’re hoping that we have the answers. Uhm, 
like it’s a, gender isn’t working for anybody. AJ: Mhm. 
JS: That’s, that’s my point of view. AJ: Right. JS: Uhm, and a lot of cis people are trying to find some sort of answers through fetishizing us… AJ: Mmm. JS: … or, like, like weird theory like from the academic world about us. Like, like I’m not, I’m not a 
Judith Butler hater, but a lot of Judith Butler is like okay gender isn’t working. AJ: Mhm. Joy Michael Starkey Interview JS: Let’s look at these more extreme… AJ: Right. 
JS: … examples… AJ: And you’re saying Judith… JS: Judith Butler, yeah, yeah. AJ: Okay. JS: Uhm, and I think that there’s a way in which it’s like let’s mine this community for information. 
AJ: Hm. JS: So I hope that cis people figure themselves out. That would be nice. AJ: [Laughs]. JS: But I like, for me, it’s also the question like my hopes are around like an end to capitalism like an 
end to prisons and policing… AJ: Mhm. JS: … like my hopes are that we can figure out a way to end structural racism and, uhm, I hope that 
we can figure out a way to really talk about, uhm, these systems instead of, instead of, moving, 
moving away from kind of just a very individual view of being trans. 
AJ: Wow. That is fascinating. Joy. JS: [Laughs]. AJ: It has been, I mean this is going to sound… JS: [Laughs]. AJ: corny. 
JS: I know what you’re going to say. [Laughs]. It’s been a joy. AJ: Yes! Because I’ve learned so much and, uhm, you know, having been out myself for over twenty­ 
five years and talked to a hundred and seventy-eight people on camera… 
JS: Wow. 
Joy Michael Starkey Interview 
AJ: … about gender identity, I learn each and every time, and I certainly have today. So thank you… JS: Thank you as well. AJ: … so much. JS: It’s been fun for me too. AJ: Yeah, and, uhm, peace! JS: You too, and good luck with your campaign. AJ: [Laughs]. Thank you. JS: [Laughs]. AJ: Thank you, thank you. Alright. 