CJ Vondal Narrator Andrea Jenkins Interviewer 
Andrea Jenkins -AJ 
CJ Vondal -CJV 
AJ: And hello. My name is Andrea Jenkins. I am the oral historian for The Transgender Oral History Project at the University of Minnesota. Today is October 15th, 2016. I am in Fargo, North Dakota at North Dakota State University, NDSU. Uhm, go bisons! Uhm, and I’m here with CJ. How you doing CJ? 
CJV: I’m doing fine. 
AJ: Hey CJ, tell me your name, spell your name, I know the CJ part is pretty easy but your last name, uh, and then your gender identity as it is today, your gender assigned at birth, and the pronouns that you use. 
CJV: Alright, my name is CJ Vondal. So it’s V.O.N.D.A.L. A lot of people put and E instead of an A. 
AJ: Wow, okay. 
CJV: And my sis always got mad, and I’m like I don’t care. 
AJ: [Laughs]. Right. 
CJV: I identify as uh, a trans man that has not transitioned yet… 
AJ: Okay. 
CJV: … but I was born a female. 
AJ: Mhm. 
CJV: And I use they, them, and their pronouns. 
AJ: Okay. 
CJV: I’m pretty much gender neutral pronouns. 
AJ: Gender neutral pronouns. Thank you so much. Uhm, where are you from? 
CJV: I’m from Grand Forks, North Dakota. 
AJ: Is that right? 
CJV: Yup. Born and raised. 
AJ: Born and raised, alright. Do you still live in Grand Forks now? 
CJV: Yep. The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies University of Minnesota 
AJ: Are you a student? 
CJV: I am a student at the University of North Dakota. UND. 
AJ: UND. Okay, in Grand Forks. 
CJV: Yep. 
AJ: What’s, what’s it like growing up in Grand Forks, North Dakota? 
CJV: Uhm, I don’t want to really say much cause I was raised kind of closed minded like I didn’t really get out. I didn’t actually know that, that the LGBT community actually existed until I was actually a Sophomore in high school. 
AJ: Oh wow. They have a GSA at your high school? 
CJV: uhm, they, they do. 
AJ: They do now? 
CJV: They, they started, I think, a couple of years ago and— 
AJ: Were you, were you still a high school student? 
CJV: I was still a high school student. I’m a Freshmen now at UND. 
AJ: Oh, wow. Okay. So you just started college? Wow, this is like your first semester. 
CJV: Yep. 
AJ: How’s it going? 
CJV: It’s going pretty well. 
AJ: Yeah? 
CJV: I would say. 
AJ: You’re making the adjustment? 
CJV: It’s kind of getting used to not being, living with my parents. I’m by myself in the dorms. I don’t have a suitemate so… 
AJ: You don’t have a roommate? 
CJV: Nope. The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies University of Minnesota 
AJ: Did you come out to your school? Is your school… 
CJV: Uhm, I actually only came out to my school, like my high school, as a lesbian. I actually came out in a newspaper article. It was during the— 
AJ: As a lesbian? 
CJV: As a lesbian during my junior year of high school. 
AJ: Mhm. 
CJV: It was the, it was for the, it was called the Same Sex Couple Marches Down for like our Prom. 
AJ: Uhuh. 
CJV: And during that time my partner was actually gender fluid. 
AJ: Okay. 
CJV: And, and it was then that I kind of started to notice that I didn’t really fit like feel like a woman. Like a started like looking up things… 
AJ: Mhm. 
CJV: … for like trying to figure out what my identity was… 
AJ: Sure. 
CJV: … but I just kept as a female but I wasn’t really comfortable. 
AJ: Mhm. 
CJV: So… 
AJ: Wow. Uhm, do you have any plans for medical interventions as a part of your transition? 
CJV: I hopefully, I want to but the only problem is I have to deal with, uhm, polycystic ovary syndrome, PCOS, which leads sometimes if it’s not treated can lead to ovary cancer and, uhm, I think it’s pelvic cancer too. 
AJ: Mhm. 
CJV: And I was actually diagnosed on my eighteenth birthday, which was one day after I actually told my mom I wanted to transition. 
AJ: Okay. The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies University of Minnesota 
CJV: So the day I was told I had PCOS they— my mom was like, “Well you have to wait and see if you can at least try to balance your hormones.” 
AJ: Right. 
CJV: Cause PCOS is pretty much a, uh, hormone disbalance. 
AJ: Okay. Alright, uhm, so thinking about medically transitioning but really want to make sure that— 
CJV: … that my— 
AJ: … your body can handle… 
CJV: … handle it. 
AJ: … yeah, that’s smart. That’s very smart. Uhm, what do you think of the Dismantling Walls conference this weekend? 
CJV: It’s actually— I’m, at first I wasn’t coming… 
AJ: Uhuh. 
CJV: … but then I’m like, “Well, I have no other plans…” 
AJ: [Laughs]. 
CJV: So I’m like, “Well, I might as well register.” And I’m actually enjoying it. I’m actually talking to a lot of people and actually opening up to them. 
AJ: Uhuh. 
CJV: I’m usually actually really shy, closed kind of guy so… 
AJ: Oh, I can’t tell. You’re, uh, pretty, uh, active and engaged since I’ve met you. Uhm, do you come to Fargo very often? 
CJV: I do not. It’s actually been almost a year since I’ve been to Fargo. 
AJ: Mhm, mhm. 
CJV: Last time I was here was for like, uhm, I think it may be a year, maybe two. I can’t really remember but it was when, uhm, this trans activist came and it was during that time that I started to notice like I actually like understood what he went through. 
AJ: Mhm. 
CJV: And I started to realize that, that’s what I kind of wanted to do too. The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies University of Minnesota 
AJ: So I’m getting a theme that when people show up in, in these communities and they’re living their lives authentically like that can have an impact on people. 
CJV: Yes, it does. 
AJ: Yeah, I mean, how did that impact you. 
CJV: It kind of gave me the strength to be the person that I want to be. 
AJ: Uhuh. 
CJV: Like I was always like shy, and I didn’t want to come out to my parents. 
AJ: Right. 
CJV: Like the first time I came out as lesbian I actually had an argument with my mom… 
AJ: Mhm. 
CJV: … cause she was actually afraid for me. 
AJ: Sure. Yeah. I mean, understandable. You know there’s a lot of bigotry and hatred out there and so parents worry. Yeah. But you’re being brave. 
CJV: Yup. 
AJ: Uhm, CJ is there anything that you want to say that I didn’t ask you? 
CJV: Mm, not that I know of. 
AJ: Okay, what— last question— what do you think is the number one issue facing the transgender community? 
CJV: I, uh, I think it’s just how people treat the trans community. 
AJ: Mhm. 
CJV: Like with the H2BE [correction: HB2] law in North Carolina. 
AJ: Mhm, mhm. 
CJV: It’s kind of harmful to everyone cause if you read it they actually mess up what, what sex means. 
AJ: Right. 
CJV: And so it’s kind of harmful. The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies University of Minnesota 
AJ: Well, it also, uhm, limits people’s ability to sue the government for discrimination. Uhm, all people, uh, immigrants, people of color, uh, I don’t think people realize that when they voted to pass this thing, uhm, so, yeah, you’re absolutely right. It, it has an impact on all our lives. 
CJV: Yeah. 
AJ: So I want to thank you so much for being a part of this conversation and this project and wish you good luck in your college career and your journey towards becoming more and more yourself, CJ. 
CJV: Thank you. 
AJ: Thank you so much. Bye bye. 
CJV: Bye. The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies University of Minnesota 