Elliot Winter 
Narrator 
Andrea Jenkins 
Interviewer 
Andrea Jenkins -AJ 
Elliot Winter -EW 
AJ: So, good afternoon. My name is Andrea Jenkins and I am the oral historian for the Transgender 
Oral History Project at the University of Minnesota Tretter Collection. Today is June 8, 2016, and I am in 
LaCrosse, Wisconsin and I have the honor and the pleasure to be sitting here today with Elliot Winter. 
How are you, Elliot? 
EW: I’m good, how are you? 
AJ: Doing pretty good. So, Elliot, if you don’t mind just introducing yourself, state your name, and 
how you spell your name, as well as your gender identity today, your gender assigned at birth, 
and your pronouns that you use. 
EW: OK, so my name is Elliot Winter. It’s E-l-l-i-o-t and I identify as male. I was assigned female at 
birth so I am a female to male transgender. Yeah, that’s it. 
AJ: Pronouns? 
EW: Oh, my pronouns are he/him. 
AJ: OK. That’s pretty awesome. So, Elliot, what is the earliest thing you remember in life? 
EW: Earliest thing I remember in life? Probably gender was one of the earliest things I remember. 
AJ: Really? 
EW: Just how much it was a ... how much of a fight it was growing up, just with clothing and things 
like that. I really think that was the earliest thing I really remember about that. 
AJ: Your childhood. 
EW: Yeah, just fighting with clothes and not really understanding where I fit in about ... why what I 
was doing was wrong. I guess that’s the biggest thing I remember or the first thing I remember. 
I don’t remember a lot from my childhood actually. That’s a lot of what I do remember. 
AJ: Where did you grow up? 
EW: I moved around a lot. I grew up in ... mainly Georgia but ... probably in the first six years of my 
life, I moved from Ohio to New Jersey, from New Jersey to Georgia and then spent the bulk of 
my life in Georgia. 
AJ: I noticed on your personal information form that you stated that you were born in Seoul. 
EW: Yeah, I was adopted, so the first thing I actually remember is ... well, not that I remember it, 
but I guess I was adopted from Seoul, Korea, at four months and then I was brought to Ohio, so 
that was the first ... on my birth certificate it will say that I was born in Ohio even though I 
wasn’t. When I was adopted I got immediate citizenship, so when they ... I don’t know, there’s 
something weird about birth certificates. But, yeah, it will say ... I think even on my passport it says origin of birth ... oh, maybe it says Seoul. I don’t know, but it is kind of confusing. So, yeah, I was born in Seoul. 
AJ: 	You were born in Seoul, but you have no memory of Seoul, basically. 
EW: 	No, not at all. 
AJ: 	Have you ever been back there? 
EW: 	No, I haven’t. I would like to go back there but I haven’t been back yet. 
AJ: 	So, you’re Korean, raised in an adopted family. 
EW: 	Yes. 
AJ: 	Where did you go to elementary school? 
EW: 	I went to three different elementary schools. The first one, I can’t remember what it was called, but the second one was, I think, Mansfield Elementary, which is in New Jersey, and then I went to Sixes Elementary, which is in Georgia. 
AJ: 	Which elementary was it? 
EW: 	Sixes Elementary. 
AJ: 	So, S-e-x-i ... 
EW: 	S-i-x-e-s. Sixes. 
AJ: 	Oh, Sixes. 
EW: 	Yeah, so Sixes Elementary in Woodstock, Georgia, I believe. I think it was Woodstock, one of 
those – Woodstock or Canton ... actually, I think that was in Canton and then my further education was in Woodstock. 
AJ: 	OK. What was elementary school like? You said you remember struggling with clothes, was your gender identity an issue for you as a young child? 
EW: 	It was without verbalization of it. I guess, just because of clothes and fighting with clothes and things like that. 
AJ: 	With your parents? 
EW: 	Yeah. And, yeah ... I mean, I think too, I guess school was also ... it was just difficult. I was very different from a lot of other people in school, whether it was gender or race or anything like that. 
AJ: 	Yeah, not a lot of Korean kids in New Jersey or Georgia. 
EW: 	No, definitely not in any of the places I lived. I had a brother and he was also adopted from Korea, two separate families. So, I guess that was really the only person that I saw or really recognized as being the same look, that looked the same as me. But, yeah, we never really talked much about it. We saw each other go through ... I watched him go through the same 
struggles I went through as far as, at really young ages, being bullied a lot for being the race that 
we were. I think because kids just didn’t understand why we looked so different. 
AJ: You guys grew up in the same family or in different families? 
EW: We were from different biological families but we grew up in the same family. 
AJ: Got it, now I understand. So, your adopted brother. 
EW: Yes. 
AJ: And he’s Korean too. 
EW: Yes, he is. 
AJ: Wow. Were there other siblings? 
EW: No, just us two. 
AJ: OK. 
EW: I don’t know if it matters but my parents couldn’t have kids and they wanted a girl and a boy, so 
that’s what they got – they thought anyways. 
AJ: That’s what they thought they got. 
EW: Yeah. 
AJ: What were your folks like? Were they wealthy, middle class, white, Black? 
EW: My parents are white; my dad is mainly European white and my mom I don’t really know much 
about her but she grew up in the United States. Yeah, my dad ... I think we were probably 
upper middle class, lived in pretty nice ... I mean my dad did create a pretty solid financial 
stability for us growing up. My mom didn’t have to work so she was a stay-at-home mom for 
quite a while until we were older and she wanted to do something for herself. But, as far as 
financially, probably until I was in high school they were higher middle class, upper middle class. 
My dad was a corporate America guy, he worked in marketing, some decent money I guess. 
AJ: So, you guys were sort of bullied around ethnicity and race, what about gender? Were you a 
tomboy? 
EW: I was a tomboy at the point when I realized that that was a thing I could do. I just remember 
meeting a girl ... my mom tried to do the most feminine things for me as far as Girl Scouts, 
gymnastics, wearing dresses ... doing the whole female role kind of thing. I remember going to 
a Girl Scout event and there was this girl there that dressed completely masculine and I, of 
course, was like, “Oh my God, that’s so masculine.” But she just ... a lot of people thought she 
was a boy and I just ... I don’t know, it was like a light went off for me and after that point 
that’s all I ever wanted to do was dress like that. That was me, I guess, understanding that 
people could dress like that without ... or, what I thought at the time, without some type of 
persecution, I guess. So, I tried. I mean, I did wear a lot of ... I did start being extremely 
tomboy – and before that, even looking back at pictures and stuff, like body language and things 
The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies 
University of Minnesota like that, minus everything but the clothes I was wearing, I was very ... seemed very masculine. And that’s when the clothes came out, when I realized that that was something that I could do. But the bullying, as far as the gender – like for what I was wearing, didn’t start happening until probably late elementary school and all the way through middle school. Middle school was probably the worst, but I think it’s the worst for a lot of people, in general. 
AJ: 	It’s a tough time. 
EW: 	Middle school in general is pretty terrible. 
AJ: 	No matter what gender presentation you’re giving, yeah. What was high school like? 
EW: 	I was really kind of ... I don’t know. One of the nice things about high school is that there were a lot of feeder schools into my high school so there was a lot more people. There was probably ... anywhere from 3200 kids up and each year it got higher. In my graduating class, there were 500 kids, plus. 
AJ: 	Yeah, that’s a pretty big school. 
EW: 	So, it was really big so it was easier to kind of blend in. I got really involved in things in high school as far as sports and student government and my studies – and everything. I really didn’t ever find a place to fit in but I feel like the bullying wasn’t as apparent because they kind of went their way and I went mine. 
AJ: 	Sure. 
EW: 	So, yeah. 
AJ: 	What sports did you play? 
EW: 	Soccer. 
AJ: 	Yeah, were you pretty good? 
EW: 	I was OK. I played prior to that so, yeah, I think I was all right. I just really enjoyed it. 
AJ: 	It was fun – you had a good time. 
EW: 	Yeah, it was a lot of fun. 
AJ: 	Cool. So, when did you first realize that you were not the gender you were assigned at birth? 
EW: 	I don’t know. I’ve thought about that question a lot and I think a lot of it ... because I have seen stories of kids who just never ... without language, without anything like that, never really ... from their first words said that they were a boy or said they were a girl. But, that wasn’t the case for me. I guess I kind of just accepted what people told me. I know I didn’t feel it or maybe didn’t necessarily believe it, but I just kind of didn’t question it. When I knew I could question what types of clothes I could wear and where I could fit in and things like that, I did, and I think that was kind of the theme throughout my whole life was until I knew otherwise, I didn’t do anything. 
AJ: 	You just kind of followed the script. 
EW: Yeah, and tried to make do the best I could. I think ... I don’t know, I guess it is part of my 
story, drugs played a major part in my coping with that. I think that was maybe how it was a 
little bit different. I started using at a very young age, like 10. 
AJ: Oh, wow. 
EW: So, yeah. And I think that’s where my red flags kind of come in, not so much ... I don’t know. 
So, yeah, I think as far as ... I didn’t actually start saying I was ... I guess using the words of, 
“I’m a man,” or anything like that until I met other transgender people. 
AJ: Sure, that makes sense. 
EW: It was an online kind of thing. I went to an online community and it was interesting because 
people were talking about their experiences and things like that and it was kind of like 
everything kind of hit me – that’s me. 
AJ: It made sense to you. 
EW: Yeah, it just clicked and I was like, “That’s who I am.” Yeah, it just was kind of freeing in a way, I 
guess, but I guess it was like ... I wanted to learn everything about transition and stuff like that 
and how to fix it as quick as possible, not that I was ... but I did feel like there was something 
wrong with me and that I needed ... it looked more like a treatment than anything other than 
that. It was just like, “This is how I’m going to feel better and alleviate all of my issues.” Yeah, 
and so I did that as soon as I found out. I guess I just say that because some people that I know 
really have to struggle with, “Should I do this? Is this the right thing for me?” as far as surgeries 
and hormone therapy and things like that that are permanently altering. 
AJ: Sure. 
EW: But for me, I was never like that. 
AJ: You didn’t question it. 
EW: Which is funny, because I question ... or no, I guess it is like a theme in my life because it was 
like ... yeah, I didn’t question anything that I was told before and then when I found out that 
this is who I am ... 
AJ: A possibility. 
EW: Yeah, it was like ... 
AJ: Full guns blazing. 
EW: Yeah, it was. I think the biggest thing that was hard was that it was going to ... I knew, 
realistically, it was going to take me a while to get to a point where I wanted to be or where I 
thought I needed to be for my own comfort level. 
AJ: Wow. So, how old were you then when you were doing this online exploration? Were you a 
teenager? An adult? 
The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies 
University of Minnesota EW: 	Well,therewas...Ithink Iwas,Ibelieve,18. Ithink I was ... 17or 18, I think ... it was probably 18, more along those lines. Yeah, and that was ... I started communicating with those people online and made some really good friends and just kept everything a secret until I had enough money to do what I needed to do and all that kind of stuff. So, yeah, those people are still a part of my life today – in that community. 
AJ: 	Really? From that online community? 
EW: 	Yeah. 
AJ: 	What was it called? Do you remember? 
EW: 	Laura’s Playground. 
AJ: 	Whose? 
EW: 	Laura’s Playground. 
AJ: 	Laura’s Playground. Oh, wow. 
EW: 	Yeah. It’s just a chat kind of thing. I don’t know how well they’re doing now because I rarely go into the chat anymore because I’ve made a lot of friends through it and just really ... I became a moderator on there for a little while. 
AJ: 	Really? 
EW: 	Yeah, and they offer crisis ... they train their moderators on crisis counseling and things so you get a lot of people ... because one of their biggest things is the suicide ... 
AJ: 	Suicide prevention. 
EW: 	Yeah. So, that was one of the biggest thing they try and aim to kind of help with, so all of their moderators are trained in suicide prevention. So, I think, whether they’re a greeter or not, I think they’re all trained. So, yeah, it was a pretty good experience. But, like I said, I don’t know how ... I know they were going down in numbers at some point, but when I was going through there, I think it was thriving for a while and there was a lot of people. They had all kinds of rooms and they had one strictly for female to male and they’d have a group once a week and all that. We’d just go on there and there’d be like ... in the high-volume times, people at a time. 
AJ: 	Oh, wow. 
EW: 	And then more possibly throughout the day or whatever. I think, for a while, I would stay on there for hours. Some days I would never log off. I’d maybe go out and do something but I would come back. 
AJ: 	You’d still be logged on. 
EW: 	Yeah. I mean, it has a timer so it would kick me out but I would always come back and ... yeah, it got me through some really, really tough times. 
AJ: 	So, that was your community? 
EW: Yeah, it was. It was my only community, really. I didn’t have anyone else that I really talked to. 
AJ: And where were you living at the time? 
EW: I think when I first started, I was in Georgia, and then the most amount of time I spent on it was 
when I was in California, that was when I was living out there because that was actually when I 
started my transition too was out there – in California. But yeah, I’d say it probably started in 
Georgia and then I kept it all the way through the next moves that I had. 
AJ: So, you’ve medically transitioned? 
EW: Not completely. I’ve had top surgery; I’ve been on hormones for four or five years ... maybe 
four years I think. 
AJ: Oh, wow. 
EW: And then I ... I think that’s all I’ve done. I’m trying to pursue bottom surgery but it’s very 
difficult because of insurance and all that. 
AJ: It’s a pretty expensive proposition. 
EW: Yeah, it is – and my insurance does not cover it, it doesn’t even cover my hormones or anything 
like that. It doesn’t cover anything – everything has been out of pocket, which is a common 
story for a lot of people. 
AJ: It is, unfortunately. Are you ... when you say my insurance, are you on your parent’s 
insurance? 
EW: Yup, until next year – yeah. 
AJ: Wow. Do you know people who have had bottom surgery? 
EW: Not ... 
AJ: Personally? 
EW: Yeah, like I’ve met people ... because that was one of the things online that was really cool was 
to watch people transition or, I guess, even on YouTube. I watched stuff on there too, but even 
people in the chat community would go through their top surgery – or vice versa because there 
were also female or ... male to female and so they were going through surgeries and you could 
learn about that, so all that kind of stuff. Those are the type of people that I knew. So, I knew . . 
. and there were definitely far less people getting bottom surgery because of the obstacles that 
were in front of them. But, there were quite a few and still ... so, I got to speak with them 
about it and still follow people on other avenues. I don’t really, really use Tumblr all that often, 
but YouTube or there’s private Yahoo! communities too where people will share their 
experiences and shut it down once it’s finished. So, yeah, as far as a one-on-one in-person 
relationship, I don’t think I’ve known anyone really – that has told me anyway, I suppose. 
AJ: Yeah. 
EW: No one has to tell me that kind of stuff. 
The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies 
University of Minnesota Elliot Winter 
AJ: No, not at all. So, do you have a sense of how much bottom surgery costs for female to male? 
EW: It’s a lot. I would say probably close to ... I don’t know, $80.000. 
AJ: Wow, that’s a lot of money. 
EW: Yeah, if not more. It just depends out of pocket how much stuff is – because you have to have . . 
. there’s just so many stages and each ... just even the hysterectomy out of pocket can be as 
high as $10,000, if not more. So, yeah, and you need that before ... 
AJ: Yeah, you need to get that before you can even get started, right? 
EW: Yes. So, that’s the part I’ve been working on the most. Actually, I need the money and stuff, 
and I’m starting to save for it and things like that, but as far as finding the right ... because a lot 
of it is not just getting it, it’s also the planning – finding the right doctors, finding the right ... 
and so it’s just ... the money is just one piece of it. And so, I feel like that’s the same way that I 
did my top surgery, as well, because I paid it out of pocket. 
AJ: Did you really? Wow. 
EW: I did a lot of research – well, and I think it helped keep me a little busy as far as like, “Ahh, I have 
so much money I still need to get together before I can have it,” and just making sure that ... I 
knew that’s what I wanted but I wanted to go with the surgeon that I was happy with. There are 
a lot of times that ... it’s not even getting the surgery and it’s like everything is great. There are 
people that botched surgeries and it’s just total regret. 
AJ: Especially people of color. 
EW: Well, there’s not a lot of people that really understand ... I don’t know how it is for anyone else, 
but for Asians, the healing process is a lot different. We have keloided scars and things ... I 
mean, keloided scars is the biggest thing I can think of because that’s what I got and no one ever 
told me ... I mean, I researched and researched, but because there aren’t a lot of ... at least 
here, I didn’t see anything ... nothing came up in my research about keloided scars. And so, I 
found out later that there were other things I could have researched as far as maybe a different 
technique, because there’s not just one technique of doing it. It just, it’s kind of ... it’s such a 
gamble. Even when you think you’re doing everything right, you’re still taking a huge chance 
when it’s like ... it’s hard not to get frustrated because it’s like ... I don’t know. To play the 
poor me card, if I didn’t ever have to do this anyways, we would have been ... but, it is. It’s just 
a very long, difficult road. Even if you have all the money in the world, I feel like you could still 
run into snags and just ... so, yeah. But even people of color, that is a really interesting point 
because I lot of the botched surgeries I’ve seen have been with people of color. 
AJ: Yeah, unfortunately I just think the medical profession and institutions in general just don’t have 
the same regard for people of color as they do for non-people of color. 
EW: Yeah, that’s something that I’ve been getting more, I guess, in tune with, I suppose. Obviously, I 
grew up in the south so I’m familiar with it but I suppose, you know, because ... I guess, I’ve 
never really had to, or felt like I had to, play a race card in any form. Elliot Winter 
AJ: Sure, absolutely -which is good for you. 
EW: Yeah, it is, but I feel like there may have been times where I just kind of took it when I didn’t 
have to, you know what I mean? Because I didn’t think as an Asian person, I didn’t know where 
I fit into the race talk and all of that stuff. Especially growing up in the south it was very 
confusing because I was really worried to meet ... this is just a small story about my friends and 
things like that when I was growing up. 
AJ: Please. 
EW: I found out what rednecks were and what their views on race was and all this stuff. So, when 
my friends would tell me their parents were rednecks, I’d be afraid to go to their houses, I’d be 
afraid to meet people in another generation who still were kind of stuck in that confederate’s 
mentality and all that stuff. And then one day my friend pulled me aside and she was like, “Why 
don’t you want to meet my family?” And I was like, “Well, because you told me they were 
‘racist’.” And I don’t really know how else to say it, but this is her own quote, “Oh, we just don’t 
like Black people.” That was all she said. 
AJ: Really? 
EW: So, there’s a skewed race thing in the south, it’s not any other race but one. Do you know what 
I mean? And so, then there are people that are super 100% racist against all races. But, I was 
like, “Do you guys understand how ignorant that is when you say you’re a racist but you’re only 
against one race?” So, anyway, that was just one thing that really confused me on the whole 
thing and so I didn’t feel like ... you know, am I allowed to say ... but anyways, as I’ve gotten 
older and things like that, and I’ve had some people treat me certain ways or have lost out on 
jobs or lost out on this, or have been sort of treated unfairly by some people, it’s coming up 
more and more where people will say, “Well, do you think it’s because you are Asian?” “Do you 
think it’s because of this?” And being in this kind of community especially, where the 
predominant Asian community is Hmong. It is an interesting conversation because I have ... I 
don’t know, I guess I don’t know. I didn’t necessarily choose to be ... how do I say it? I don’t 
know. I guess, it’s just I wonder, thinking back, did I face oppression growing up and things like 
that – besides the whole being bullied and things like that? But as far as my chances and 
opportunities and things like that. I guess, what I’m trying to say is that I don’t think I’ve 
become as ... well, I haven’t been as aware of it as I am today and I think because a lot of 
people are talking about it too, and not just in one dynamic of one race. 
AJ: Black and white, but more broadly around other ... 
EW: Yeah, because I remember one of my friends, she’s in college right now, and she was doing 
some kind of, I don’t know, a research project, and she a survey and it was asking a bunch of 
questions based on ... and it wasn’t just Black and white too, it was based on ... I guess, the 
color of your skin was maybe what it was. I was surprised at how many questions I could 
answer yes to. I was like, “Huh?” It really is an interesting point because I think a lot of the time, 
Asians do get a little lost in the conversation – as well as other ethnicities too. 
AJ: Absolutely. Elliot Winter 
EW: And so, yeah, I don’t know. 
AJ: Yeah, I think that’s absolutely true. 
EW: Yeah. 
AJ: You’re talking a little bit about sort of oppression and discrimination, do you feel like you’ve 
been discriminated against because of your transgender identity? 
EW: I think the biggest place where I felt that is in the hospital setting with the medical community. 
AJ: Really? 
EW: Yeah. And, I don’t know, I think a lot of the times when I think I have been, it comes down to 
education and things like that where I think that people haven’t been educated properly or at 
all. But, I have felt very violated in terms of people not understanding and either using the 
wrong language or being directly ... I don’t know, harsher to me than they would have been if I 
had just been unbiologically born female. 
AJ: Right, or male. 
EW: Yeah, or biologically male or any of those things. The transgender part of it just made things 
different. Yeah, so, I think I have felt discriminated against in that sense and in order to ... and, 
it’s kept me from getting proper medical care too because I’ve been scared to meet doctors and 
been scared to pursue treatments, because if there isn’t anyone that outwardly expresses that 
they have worked with the transgender community, or worked for the transgender community, 
how would they know? And I’ve gotten better about it, to like ... I kind of started off when I go 
and meet someone new, I’m like, “Have you ever met with a transgender person? Have you 
ever done this?” And then kind of being in charge of my own comfort level. I’ve kind of had to 
take charge of that. And I’m trying to think if I’ve dealt with it anywhere else. 
AJ: What about school? 
EW: Yeah, I did, I think. I don’t know if it was necessarily because of my transgender status, because 
obviously, I wasn’t out at this point in middle school, but because I dressed very masculine and 
acted very masculine and was bullied, I had a lot through middle school. I had a lot of people 
that, you know, I think back that had they been educated on trans people they might have been 
able to assist me better, but because of them not being and other reasons, I had some lady ... it 
was a counselor who, at one point, was trying to push me and say that she thought I was gay. 
She would be like, “It’s OK to be gay.” But telling me that I was gay. It didn’t seem right to me. 
AJ: Yeah, “I’m not gay.” 
EW: I was like, “What are you talking about?” It’s shocking to think back that it was from a counselor 
who could have been so much more useful than that. But, I also had a literature teacher who I 
respected a lot, up until this point, and she said to me, “You know, if you don’t like getting 
bullied so much, why don’t you just dress like a girl?” And that was a big twist for me, because 
that’s when my drug use really escalated and then also I started trying to play the role of my 
assigned gender and it just caused me a lot of problems. Because nobody there knew, and I feel Elliot Winter 
like there’s some kind of ... I don’t know if it’s a responsibility, but people that are working with 
kids at a very vulnerable point in their lives. How was I supposed to know? But maybe they 
could have, if there had been education in the schools or education in the ... or even just 
training. 
AJ: Right. 
EW: But, yeah. Obviously, I could have maybe still stuck it to the man and been like, “Well, because I 
like dressing like this.” But, that wasn’t the kid that I was. 
AJ: So, you tried to conform. 
EW: I did for a good part of my life. 
AJ: And it didn’t work? 
EW: No. I was heavily addicted to opiates and that was the only way that it worked was that I was 
completely numb to everything. 
AJ: Oh, wow. 
EW: And it wasn’t until I started sobering up, which having bouts of sobriety where I was able to 
freely think and ... it was funny because ... 
AJ: And get back to your body, so to speak. 
EW: Yeah, because the times that I did sober up, you would see a drastic change in my clothing 
choice and the way that I acted; whereas, if I was using I was very like, “This is the way I have to 
be.” I really tried to put on that mask. And I really do believe that the only way I was able to do 
that was through drugs. 
AJ: So, in some ways you’re ... what I hear, and please correct me if I’m off-base, but your drug use 
was connected to your gender identity. 
EW: Very much so. 
AJ: But really trying to conform. 
EW: Yeah, I think that would be accurate. Because even thinking back to when I first started using 
was during the early onset of puberty, which for me, when I think about it, that was my way of 
dealing with it – essentially it was around puberty that makes me ... I kind of am glad that I had 
drugs at that time because I know how hard it was for a lot of people. 
AJ: Yeah, it’s a tough time. 
EW: Yeah, and even with drugs it was difficult. But, I feel like it was easier and I could deal with it – 
my body was changing and there was nothing I could do about it. So, this is the way I dealt with 
it. 
AJ: Just numbed myself out. Elliot Winter 
EW: Yeah. I think it was a very ... it is accurate to say that that’s what I used to help myself conform 
to society’s way that I should be. 
AJ: Right, right. Did you ... so, what terms have you used to describe yourself over time related to . 
. .? Like, “I was a tomboy.” Did you ever identify as a lesbian or queer or whatever? Or, I don’t 
know. 
EW: Um ... I’m trying to think. I did take the label of tomboy, a lot, but because that’s how it was 
presented to me. My mom was like, “You’re just a tomboy, this is just a phase,” and all that 
stuff. So, I really identified with that tomboy label and things like that. I adamantly, adamantly, 
opposed to being lesbian and I think that ... and not today, but then, I did come from a very 
religious household and I was so distraught and thinking that people actually thought I was a 
lesbian. 
AJ: OK. 
EW: It just ... I don’t know, it was a hard thing. I had that label thrust upon me throughout my 
whole life. I remember at one point when I was being bullied, someone had a girl come and ask 
me out on a date – like as a joke during a fire drill. Everyone thought I was a lesbian, like a butch 
lesbian. It sucked because I was like, “I’m not, I know I’m not.” But at the same time, I don’t 
think I even allowed myself to even start exploring who I was attracted to and I tried to force 
myself to be attracted to men, but ... I would even say, “No, I’m totally straight, I like men.” 
But, I don’t know. I think it stopped at, “I’m not a lesbian, period,” and then I never really got to 
explore anything with that. So, as far as a lesbian, I don’t think that was ever a label that I took 
on and I think that trans and FTM, and transsexual and words like that were the only words that 
I ever really identified with when I got to that point. 
AJ: OK, that’s interesting. 
EW: It is. 
AJ: So, who are you attracted to now? 
EW: Women – actually, both. 
AJ: Yeah? Would you call yourself bi or queer? 
EW: I think it changes. Sometimes ... I think I’m becoming more comfortable with saying that I’m 
bisexual on a consistent basis. I’m in a committed relationship right now with a woman. 
AJ: Cool, awesome. 
EW: Yeah, and so I felt like the whole label didn’t really matter that much anymore to me, but I also 
didn’t want to be afraid to say I was bisexual either. It was something that I really went through 
at the beginning of my transition was sexuality, because sexual ... it was something that was 
told to me and then it really kind of helped me explore everything, was that sexuality and 
gender identity were different, they were separate from each other. And, so that really helped 
open it up for me. But I also ... I was afraid to be attracted to men because ... I don’t know, 
because of maybe society and the way that ... so, I am a man so then I can’t ... and I’m a Elliot Winter 
female to male transgender so I can’t be attracted to men because it would be too confusing to 
people. 
AJ: Right. 
EW: And I just wouldn’t allow myself and anytime I found myself become attracted to a man, I would 
try and shut it off and say that I’m a straight man and that’s all I can be and it’s OK and all this 
stuff. And then when I started to ... I met one guy, in particular, that had come to terms or was 
coming to terms with being trans and gay, and strictly gay – he didn’t like women. He had tried 
to like women but he didn’t. 
AJ: Right. 
EW: And so, he kind of helped me kind of explore it and come to terms with it and yeah, one of the 
biggest things that I still question today, is even though I am attracted to both and I do believe 
that, is that whether my attraction to men was more of an envious kind of thing – like, that kind 
of penis envy or whatever. That I really was ... I really wanted so much or felt so much like that 
and was there somehow ... it just got confused in a way. I don’t know if that is the case, but I 
kind of ... if I ever were to break up with the relationship that I’m in and then have to pursue 
that, maybe I’ll do it with a lot less restriction and be able to move forward with that. But, yeah, 
like I said I am in a happy relationship and I’ve been in it for three years, a little over three years. 
AJ: Nice, congratulations. 
EW: Thank you. That was another thing that came from that community, that online community, 
because I met a lot of people from all over the world. I actually, through one of them who lives 
in Australia, introduced me to one of his friends from Australia as well and I met this girl. When 
I went over to meet him, I met her and ended up ... we had started an online relationship 
before that, but it wasn’t anything super serious or whatever, it was what it was. And then I 
met her and it was just like ... I don’t know, we tried to commit to a relationship and we’ve 
seen each other four times since then for pretty significant chunks of time and have really just . . 
. we’re trying to get her a visa to move here. 
AJ: So, she’s not here right at this moment? 
EW: No. 
AJ: Is she Australian? 
EW: She is, she’s Australian. 
AJ: Wow. 
EW: She hopefully going to relocate and ... 
AJ: And you’ve been to Australia? 
EW: Yes, I’ve been there. 
AJ: And she’s been here to visit. EW: 	Yup. I’ve been there three times and she’s been here once. 
AJ: 	Wow, that’s pretty amazing. 
EW: 	Yeah, it’s interesting. It’s still kind of blows my mind sometimes. 
AJ: 	And you guys are monogamous? 
EW: 	We are. We’ve had conversations of polyamory before and I’m not sure if it was because of the distance that I was exploring that or not. She’s completely ... she wants to be monogamous, I think, at this point. It was a conversation we had had, especially when I was exploring the whole, “Am I attracted to men? Am I attracted to women?” And maybe kind of introducing a man into the relationship at one point, but I think at this point we’re monogamous. 
AJ: 	Monogamous, that’s cool. 
EW: 	But it was an exploration. And I think that it’s ... I think it comes with the freedom of being myself, or the freedom to be myself now that I’m able to explore some of the other avenues today – because that would be something that I would have never, ever thought to even think about or allow myself to think about, let alone discuss with someone else. But I did. It was just ... there is a freedom that comes from being who you are that allows you to really think more freely in every aspect, really. 
AJ: 	I think so. 
EW: 	I don’t know if I’m answering all your questions. I kind of keep going off on tangents. 
AJ: 	No, you’re ... this is absolutely perfect, Elliot. What’s your relationship like with your family now? 
EW: 	It’s pretty good. 
AJ: 	Do you still live with your folks? 
EW: 	I don’t. I actually just recently moved out on my own, which has been really good for me. 
AJ: 	But they’re very aware of your gender transition? 
EW: 	They are, they are. And, like I said, I transitioned while I was out in California, so it was kind of with them kind of removed from the situation – for about two years or so. But, I did tell them. And that was ... it was a big problem. My mom is very religious and her family is very religious. There was a point where I really thought she was going to disown me and she almost did. I think that if things had not happened in the way that they did, that she probably would have. But because I had started transitioning out in California, they offered for me to come move here and they saw me ... through the transition, they saw me change my name and they saw me do all this stuff, and it became real for them. And so, she slowly just ... actually slowly at first, but then quite quickly came around to it. I thought it was going to be either years or never, but I think in total it took her three or four years to really become accepting and just ... she calls me “her son” today. 
AJ: 	Wow. 
Elliot Winter 
EW: She still struggles with her own family but they’ve disowned me so that doesn’t really matter to 
me, but I’m sure it’s hard for her. So, yeah. My dad, he ... my dad and I, our relationship is kind 
of a difficult relationship anyways, but surprisingly, he was the most accepting. 
AJ: Really? 
EW: Yeah, and he was just like, “You know, whatever.” He was like, “I don’t ...” I don’t know if he 
realized how serious it was, but it was just kind of like, “OK, if you want to do that, that’s on 
you.” He cared more about me being sober and happy, I guess. I don’t know if happy is really a 
thing, but sober ... because I was wrecking his life, a lot. So, yeah. But, yeah, today they’re 
extremely supportive, I guess. It seems extremely supportive to me because of how non- 
supportive my mom was at one point. I couldn’t ask for anything more, really, at this point. But, 
as far as the other relationship ... because we’ve had a lot of issues besides the trans issue. 
AJ: Yeah, I can imagine – the opioids at 10. 
EW: Yeah. 
AJ: That’s got to get your parents a little upset. 
EW: Yeah. 
AJ: Because they could tell. Opioid is not the kind of addiction that you can hide very easily. 
EW: Surprisingly, they actually didn’t ... they didn’t actually know a lot of the childhood and the 
usage, I mean, until I came crashing down because I was very functional for a long time – I hid it 
very well and I kind of lived two different lives for a really long time. And then when I was ... 
there’s like a progression of addiction and when I lost that functionality piece, that’s when they 
finally realized. And, I think they were in denial for a long time too. They didn’t want to see the 
red flags or anything like that. But not until my first year in college did they know anything 
about drug use or anything like that. So, yeah. But, even all that caused a lot of problems. So, 
yeah. I think, though, now especially with me having recently moved out and kind of doing my 
own thing has really helped the relationship a lot. 
AJ: I bet. 
EW: My dad is my dad and he’s a little ... I don’t know how to say it – like controlling, I guess. So, 
yeah, it’s been awesome and I think it’s helped ... I don’t know. The trans thing, with our 
family, it just really kind of became a moot point, I think, about two years ago. It’s becoming 
progressively easier to discuss certain things with them because before my mom just didn’t 
want to hear it – it was better not to discuss anything. But now, I can tell them ... like I can 
share things with them about the surgeries that I need to have. My mom actually came, when I 
got my top surgery, and she took care of me. 
AJ: She was there for you. 
EW: At first it was going to be my brother. It was in Florida and my brother lives in Georgia and I was 
going to have him come down and all this stuff. And he couldn’t do it, so my mom was like, “OK, 
let’s do it.” It was hard. I struggled through it. I have a very low pain tolerance and she was still Elliot Winter 
in that stage of, “Why would you do this to yourself?” That kind of thing. So, she kind of ... the 
empathy and stuff was kind of lacking there and it caused a little bit of tension because she was 
like, “Well, you didn’t have to do this and blah, blah, blah.” But, I think in the bigger picture ... 
AJ: And you weren’t doing pain killers or anything like that, huh? 
EW: I had sobered up, probably two days before my surgery. So, yeah, it was an ongoing problem. 
But I knew that I couldn’t. It was ... I don’t know, it was a struggle, because I almost didn’t 
make it to my surgery financially because of the drug use that I was doing. But, yeah, I wasn’t 
using going into the operating room but I was using shortly before that. I think that that’s still 
something that they don’t know about. Anyways, but overall with everything, I think that 
experience between my mother and I really helped the relationship later on. 
AJ: Right. 
EW: And even just the fact that she said she would go wasenough, regardless of whatever happened 
down there – she went. 
AJ: She was there. What about your brother? Are you guys close? 
EW: Yeah, I mean he never really cared much about the gender. He didn’t. I don’t really know if he 
ever ... I think he was probably the one who saw ... it was the most non-surprising to him, I 
think. But, at the same time, it was like he ... yeah, he’s a realist, I guess, and he was like, 
“There’s bigger problems than your gender. If that’s what you want to do, do it.” And so, we 
didn’t really discuss it. He wasn’t a big shoulder to lean on through the whole process, but it 
was just someone that I knew who didn’t judge me or didn’t care about what I was going to look 
like – or anything really ... if it was going to impact his life or, you know. It just was what it was 
and he didn’t care. 
AJ: So, do you feel like ... does he love you? Do you guys still love each other? Are you close? 
EW: We’re not so close ... I think we have the potential to get closer, but I think like everything, my 
drug addiction had a lot to do with the relationship more so than my gender. So, I think that as I 
remain sober and become a productive member of society, our relationship will get a lot closer. 
AJ: Yeah. But the relationships are still there with family? 
EW: Oh, yeah. I never ... well, I can’t say I never lost a relationship, but what I kept from it was a lot 
better than what I lost. I did lose an entire half a family – my mom’s family just completely ... 
they wrote me ... my mom’s sister wrote me a letter basically saying I was an abomination and 
all this stuff. 
AJ: I’m sorry. 
EW: No, I mean compared to a lot of things that have happened to people, as far as becoming 
homeless and things like that, it was hurtful but I still was able to see what I still had. But, yeah 
– so I lost ... and I grew up with my cousins, so I lost those relationships too, all because of 
religion. And so, that ... it wasn’t so much my anger towards them as it was organized religion, 
so I have a very big distaste for organized religion and any type of religion, I think. Elliot Winter 
AJ: Understood. 
EW: So, yeah. 
AJ: What have been some of the positive aspects of expressing your true gender identity? One 
thing is, it sounds like now that you’ve been able to come out and be who you are, the anxiety 
and the drug use has subsided or gone away – or you’re able to control that better. 
EW: Yeah, I had to ... it was kind of a hard thing for me to accept because, at first, when I had been 
addicted for however long and I finally discovered this is who I am and started transitioning, that 
I thought that my drug addiction would just go away. I thought this was the reason I started 
using, I’m no longer going to be a drug addict, I have no reason to use anymore. But, the 
problem that I had to come to understand was that regardless of why I started using, it became 
my coping mechanism for everything and that wasn’t just going to go away – and just because I 
am who I am and I’ve accepted that, doesn’t mean that I’m not going to be an addict anymore. 
Once an addict ... 
AJ: And there’s some physical aspects that happen too once you start using ... 
EW: Oh, yeah, it was still a struggle for me and it took another ... gosh, probably another four years 
to really sober up. I’ve only been sober now five months. 
AJ: OK, congratulations. 
EW: Well, thank you. 
AJ: I know it’s one day at a time. 
EW: It is, but geez, it’s been awesome. I don’t know, it was difficult to have to spend that long really 
trying to separate the two – that the gender and the addiction were two separate things. Yeah, 
but I think also the ... and I think this time in treatment, because I just went to treatment – 
that’s how I’ve stayed sober this long ... well, not how I’ve stayed sober this long but it was the 
starting point. And one of the things, my gender was kind of explored a lot more this time 
around, because before I didn’t want to talk about it and I really didn’t want to explore it, it just 
wasn’t anyone else’s business and whatever. This time, regardless of what I said, this counselor 
really was like, “All the stuff that you’ve been through, you know, I think that it’s an asset to 
your recovery.” Regardless of that, it just really ... I don’t know, it really helped to really be ... 
for her to explore just even the tiny bit that she did and to really ... I don’t know, just accept 
that ... because I’ve been living stealth for the last ... since I’ve changed my name, I guess – 
even before I changed my name. 
AJ: Yeah, because you look like a straight dude. 
EW: Yeah, once I passed I really didn’t want to tell anyone. I think some of it was safety and some of 
it was all the shit that I had dealt with before. I was like, “I’m not in a good place, I don’t to risk 
it.” I felt like a sort of entitlement or whatever. I’m slowly breaking that down a little bit. There 
is some good that I can do, not only in the trans community but also the addiction aspect of 
things because there are a lot of people like me that ... addiction is a big part, I mean not a big 
part, but it is a common thing with people that are trans. Elliot Winter 
AJ: Yeah, absolutely. 
EW: And I don’t think people ever talk, really, much about that. The trans community is aware of it, 
but I don’t think other people really are. 
AJ: The broader community? 
EW: Yeah. So, I don’t know, just the ability to really explore that this time in treatment and have 
someone unafraid to ask me – even though they probably didn’t understand it completely, but 
they were like ... I don’t know, just saw the benefit in it. I don’t know, it really helped this time 
around because it is part of who I am, whether I want to run from it or not. It is a part of me 
and all that stuff is part of what made me who I am today. 
AJ: Right. 
EW: And I’m OK with that today and I think that that has been one of the biggest helps in sobriety 
this time because before it was like, you know, “Oh, I found the reason why I started using, now 
I shouldn’t need to use anymore.” 
AJ: Right. 
EW: And I didn’t get it, it was like, “What’s wrong? Why isn’t this working?” But, part of addiction is 
the insanity of continuing to try and do the same thing over and over again and expecting it to 
be different. 
AJ: Exactly. 
EW: But, I did things a little differently this time and I think it’s been better. This, I never would have 
done. I would have been like, “I am male,” and probably would never sign up to speak about it – 
yeah. 
AJ: Oh, wow. OK. 
EW: Because, I don’t know ... I just have been really closed off to it for a really long time. So, I don’t 
know. 
AJ: Well, I am so grateful that you are here, this has been an amazing conversation. So, you know, 
there’s been a lot of visibility around transgender people, transgender issues, particularly in the 
last ... I don’t know, four or five years. Laverne Cox on the cover of magazines, Orange is the 
New Black, Caitlyn Jenner, I am Cait, you know ... what do you think about that level of visibility 
and how that impacts the life of transgender people. Is it a good thing? Is it a bad thing? And 
then, do you think that has helped your parents come around a little bit? Because when you 
were talking about your mom, that’s one of the questions that came in my mind was all this 
visibility. Is that helping or not? 
EW: Well, I guess I’ll start with the second question first. So, I’m not really sure with my mother how 
much of her watching me helped or the media and stuff, because before I had offered to send 
her information about it and things like that, and she just didn’t want to hear anything about it. 
But, I will say my father, as far as all the stuff in the media, the biggest thing that impacts him 
are the stories not so much about people that have high profiles in the media and things like Elliot Winter 
that, but the smaller stories – like about college students, about getting on a men’s swim team 
when they’re transgender and having this beautiful story about how this guy was going to 
forego his comfortableness or whatever to continue to swim on the women’s team. He was 
going to forego his hormones and all this stuff, but he got his surgery but he wasn’t allowed to 
take hormones to continue swimming, but he loved swimming so much he was going to swim on 
the women’s team. But then his coach saw how much he was struggling and asked the men’s 
coach if he could swim for his team. 
AJ: Wow, that’s a great story. 
EW: And the coach said, “He’s a man, he might as well.” And, he did it. Those are the kinds of 
stories that my dad shows me and those are the kinds of ones that impact him. As far as like 
Caitlyn Jenner and Orange is the New Black and Laverne Cox and things, I don’t think that they 
pay much attention to it. 
AJ: Sure. 
EW: Yeah, so ... I don’t know why that is, but I kind of like it because I like hearing that he read 
about this story, about this kid, or things like that that are similar to their experiences. 
AJ: Homecoming kings and all of that kind of stuff. 
EW: Absolutely. 
AJ: No, that makes sense. 
EW: And so as far as me, I don’t know how ... I have listened to a few of Caitlyn Jenner’s interviews 
and they have been a little bit painful to listen to, but, you know ... I mean, for me, it’s kind of 
interesting because it shows that we’re human too and just because Caitlyn Jenner is trans does 
not mean that she understands everything about the trans community or any of this stuff. But, 
at the same time, I don’t think that’s how media works and I think that they expect her to be ... 
or the community, not just our community, but the community at large just kind of views her as 
the speaking person, or a speaking person, for the trans community. So, I think that in itself is a 
little dangerous because it creates some issues and ... Caitlyn Jenner might be the only trans 
person someone knows or sees and I think that’s a little scary. 
AJ: Yeah, that’s only one story. 
EW: Yeah, and I think that ... I don’t know why the idea of individuality gets lost all the time. Even in 
addiction, for example, people keep trying to find the one thing that’s going to cure everybody, 
but it’s like one size doesn’t fit all – it’s an individual program and people need to find what 
works for them. Being put in jail is not going to help this person or everyone, or the drug court 
program is not going to help everyone. I think the same thing goes for a lot of things – like, you 
know, we’re all different and we all require different things. So, to think that ... I don’t know. I 
do think that the one good thing about them being in the media or just having more visibility, is 
the dialog that’s coming from it and people are talking about it. The word is not so ... like 
scary, I guess, to people. So, people ... I don’t know, so I think that kind of outweighs the bad 
things that are happening right now – at least, in my opinion. I think that it’s better that people Elliot Winter 
are talking about it because there’s more of a chance for people to get educated on it than it is 
to just not talk about it at all and just keep it a huge secret. 
AJ: Absolutely. 
EW: So, I don’t know. 
AJ: Has there been one person or organization or somebody, a specific moment, that has been 
really impactful in your transition or your gender identity? You told me about Laura’s 
Playground and how impactful that was. 
EW: Yeah. 
AJ: When was the first time you ever met a transgender person? 
EW: Hmm. You know, I mean, I’ve met trans people in person and stuff, but when I started to it 
came after meeting them through Laura’s Playground. So, I met up with someone in California 
and then I also met up with those people in Australia. But, I think Laura’s Playground was the 
most ... 
AJ: It was the most impactful? 
EW: Yeah, because I’d already known those people by the time I met them, so meeting them wasn’t 
any ... 
AJ: Revelation or anything. 
EW: Yeah, it really wasn’t. I mean, I really bonded with these guys. We’d stay up on video chats and 
drink and have fun. It was just like I was hanging out with people in real life. It ... I don’t know. 
The internet and meeting people, that was not weird to me. Some people are like, “Oh, wow, 
you met people online – that’s kind of bad, why are you doing that?” But, for me, it was like ... 
no, it wasn’t any different. I don’t know. I think that it was awesome that that resource was 
available to me because I don’t think that even if I had this kind of environment in my 
hometown, I probably wouldn’t have gone to it because I was that ... oh man, I don’t know. I 
just am very ... well, I’ve gotten better and I think it has to do with transitioning and being 
comfortable with who I am, but I was very introverted and very anti-social and all of these 
things. A social group like this is not something that I probably would have ever let myself do, 
and so I think Laura’s Playground was the most impactful for me because I was able to ... I can’t 
even express how awesome that was for me when that light just went off with all those people 
– just like, this is what I have been looking for my whole life, this is who I am. When you realize 
that that’s who you are, when it’s staring you right in the face – it’s crazy. I don’t know, but 
yeah, I think that was probably the biggest thing, and the people that I met there. 
AJ: OK, that’s cool. Where do you see the transgender community in year from now? 
EW: Whoa, years – man. I hope a lot more visible. I don’t know how to explain it but, you know, 
like maybe as visible as the gay community or if not, better. I mean, years is a long time but I 
know the struggle for the gay community has been probably ... I don’t know much, but 
probably just about as long. AJ: Well, it’s been about years now of active political engagement – yeah. 
EW: So, yeah, I’d hope somewhere like that, because there’s still a lot of things that aren’t talked 
about obviously that are really important – like insurance, obviously. Now I’m going blank but . . 
. 
AJ: Employment, health care. 
EW: Yeah, employment, health care. 
AJ: Safety. I mean, trans people are getting murdered out here. 
EW: Yeah, and that’s the thing is that people don’t talk about that, people that ... it is dangerous for 
people ... more so in certain parts of the United States, or even in the world. It happens and 
people ... I don’t know. And too, the other thing I was going to say is there are still a few states 
where you can’t change your birth certificate for the gender, which is a problem. Obviously, my 
birth certificate is run through Ohio, which is one of those states. So, getting married is not 
something that I’ll ... most places a birth certificate is required and because I’m still labeled as a 
female, I would have to get married as a gay person and not as a man. And so, that’s really kind 
of disheartening and I think that ... so, there’s those things too, and the military too. You know, 
we can’t serve in the military which has been an obstacle for me because I did want to serve in 
the military but I couldn’t. So, yeah. And I know people that have joined the military as a 
woman who were men because they wanted to serve their country so badly – and then how 
much trouble people can get in for doing that. 
AJ: Yes. 
EW: Or doing it the other way, and things like that. So, I don’t know – there’s just so many things that 
I hope change. And in years, even not so much in the community – like the community at 
large, but also within our own community as far as like surgeries being more up-to-date and 
more possible and the research that they’re doing for cis people is looked at as important as for 
transgender people as well. 
AJ: Yes. 
EW: Then in years, and maybe it’s a long shot, is that we’re equal – better equality all across the 
board. 
AJ: Wow. 
EW: Every year we’re getting better but also it feels like we’re taking steps backwards. One group 
goes a little farther and then some other groups take some steps back and it’s like maybe if we 
have another years to do it better it will get better. I don’t know – I hope, I really do, because 
it sucks. I don’t understand why it’s so difficult for people to see that just every human is the 
same. 
AJ: Yeah. 
EW: I don’t understand why. I was just watching ... this is kind of off topic, but you know Roots? 
The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies 
University of Minnesota Elliot Winter 
AJ: Yeah, I watched it myself. 
EW: Did you watch the re-make of it? 
AJ: Yes, I did. 
EW: So, I was just like ... I don’t know, just even that and stuff ... I don’t know why it’s so ... like 
how people couldn’t see how enslaving someone is wrong. How is any one human life less than 
another? Like that concept has ever been a thing – it blows my mind and I don’t understand it 
and how people could do that. I don’t know, it’s bizarre and I hope that it does get ... we’ve 
come a long way since then ... 
AJ: Yes. 
EW: But it’s ... I don’t know why it’s so slow. 
AJ: We still have a long way to go. 
EW: I know, it’s very ... I mean, one of the things, and I can’t remember what they said verbatim, 
but about how the chains are now just metaphors – they still exist but they’re not visible, you 
can’t see them but they’re there. Yeah, it’s sad – it really is sad. 
AJ: It is. We’ve got to break those chains, Elliot. 
EW: Yeah, absolutely. 
AJ: All right. Well, I really appreciate you being willing to sit down and talk with me today. Thank 
you so much for your time and your honesty and your forthrightness in sharing your story. 
These are the kind of stories that your dad likes so ... overcoming adversity. 
EW: Yeah. 
AJ: All right, Elliot. Until we meet again, my friend. 
EW: Yeah, definitely. 
AJ: Thank you. 
EW: Yes, thank you. 