Richard (Katherine) Longnecker Narrator Andrea Jenkins Interviewer The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies University of Minnesota March 17, 2017 The Transgender Oral History Project of the Upper Midwest will empower individuals to tell their story, while providing students, historians, and the public with a more rich foundation of primary source material about the transgender community. The project is part of the Tretter Collection at the University of Minnesota. The archive provides a record of GLBT thought, knowledge and culture for current and future generations and is available to students, researchers and members of the public. The Transgender Oral History Project will collect up to 400 hours of oral histories involving 200 to 300 individuals over the next three years. Major efforts will be the recruitment of individuals of all ages and experiences, and documenting the work of The Program in Human Sexuality. This project will be led by Andrea Jenkins, poet, writer, and trans-activist. Andrea brings years of experience working in government, non-profits and LGBT organizations. If you are interested in being involved in this exciting project, please contact Andrea. Andrea Jenkins jenki120@umn.edu (612) 625-4379 1 Andrea Jenkins -AJ 2 Richard (Katherine) Longnecker -RL 3 4 AJ: So, hello. 5 RL: Hi, how are you today? 6 AJ: I’m very, very good. My name is Andrea Jenkins and I am the oral historian for the Transgender 7 Oral History Project and I am in Florida, in Lake Placid, Florida. 8 RL: Lake Placid Park. 9 AJ: Lake Placid Park, Florida, and I’m here today with Richard Longnecker, who also goes by 10 Katherine. And, today is March 17, 2017. And, yeah, this is the Tretter Collection Transgender 11 Oral History Project. How are you doing today, Richard? 12 RL: Doing fine, doing fine. 13 AJ: Wow. I know you mentioned that you were just in the hospital for the past four days, so I want 14 to thank you for sitting here and talking with us today. I really appreciate it. 15 RL: Well, ironically, I’m back up to strength 100% so it worked out. 16 AJ: It worked out. 17 RL: Ironically well. 18 AJ: You look great, yeah. You look great. So, Richard, I’m going to ask a few things. Can you state 19 your name, and any name that you want to, and then make sure we spell it so that we can make 20 sure that we have it spelled right. Tell me your gender identity today and your gender identity 21 assigned at birth, and what pronouns do you use. 22 RL: Male in gender, male at birth. I was born in New York City, New York, August 15, 1942. 23 AJ: 1942, wow. 24 RL: Correct. Richard Andrew Longnecker is my given name. 25 AJ: All right. 26 RL: I go by the nickname Katherine sometimes. 27 AJ: OK. 28 RL: I’ve had various different femme names I’ve used in the past but Kathy or Katherine seems to be 29 the one I prefer. 30 AJ: Really? Wow. So, when you think about your gender identity, do you think of yourself as a 31 crossdresser, a transgender person, a bi-gender person? How do you describe yourself? Richard (Katherine) Longnecker 4 The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies University of Minnesota RL: Basically, I’m a crossdresser, and that’s an interesting variation too, because 1 I have a fetish on 2 hair, feminine hair dos. I love to have my hair done, I love to wear it long, I love to wear it very 3 feminine. For that to be accepted by society, it goes with the female gender so I find that I have 4 to crossdress, do make-up – the more feminine I can look, other than the hair justifies wearing 5 the hair that way. I enjoy it, 100%. Unfortunately, I have to . . . well, not unfortunately, but 6 crossdress to do it and that’s brought a whole lifetime of living, even full-time, as a female on 7 my preference. 8 AJ: Wow. You know, you mentioned your hair and I’m looking at your scrap book that you have 9 there. Can you hold it up so we can just get an image of your hair? 10 RL: Well, that would be the front page. 11 AJ: Yeah. 12 RL: There are many pictures in here, but I enjoy having the pictures taken, naturally. I enjoy having 13 my hair roller set, enjoy having a manicure. And again, as a woman, dressing as a woman and 14 presenting myself as Katherine. It’s very easy to go in and make appointments and do whatever 15 I want to do. 16 AJ: Right. 17 RL: I have always . . . well, there’s one picture in here I’ll show you. Seventy-four years old, and I 18 still look half-way feminine. Here in the park we have a costume parade . . . 19 AJ: So, are both of those images you? 20 RL: Yeah, that’s me. 21 AJ: Oh, wow – OK. 22 RL: This was make-up done professionally by a make-up artist, whereas this is my own level of 23 make-up. Again, I used to go at least weekly to get my hair done and naturally, to be accepted 24 by the other clientele, you wear make-up and you play the part. But, here in the park we have a 25 costume parade. It happens to be tomorrow and . . . 26 AJ: Wow, tomorrow. 27 RL: Tomorrow, ironically. 28 AJ: So, you’re going to wear a short hairdo? 29 RL: No, tomorrow . . . I don’t think I’m going to do it tomorrow; I just got out of the hospital and I’m 30 not ready yet. But, I’ve won for the past three years. In fact, there’s pictures on the wall in here 31 – I’ve won 1st place in the costume party dressed as female. I still, I guess, this is my age now – 32 long hair is still OK, I like it, but it doesn’t have the fascination that it had when I was younger. I 33 think that comes with age. I had prostate cancer last year and the prostate cancer eliminated 34 any real male functions and the reduction of the genitals – the whole nine yards. And hair 35 growth, though, they give you female hormones when you take the radiation treatment. It was 36 interesting because all of a sudden I seem to be growing breasts a little bit larger and a little hip Richard (Katherine) Longnecker 5 The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies University of Minnesota enlargement and not much of a sexual drive anymore. I no longer get an 1 erection or secretion 2 semen. 3 AJ: Sure. 4 RL: That’s the price you pay to get a little older. 5 AJ: Yeah. How did you feel about the female hormones? Was it a problem for you? Did you feel 6 good? Did you feel different at all? 7 RL: Yes. They tell you female hormones and I was a little bit excited, actually, about that. “Oh, 8 that’s interesting – female hormones, OK.” You don’t really know the results until after the 9 radiation tests and that went on for eight weeks every day. The after effects are the complete 10 loss of your masculinity, so to speak, which is interesting. I wasn’t expecting that. If that would 11 have happened 40 years ago, great – but it happens as you’re older. 12 AJ: Sure. 13 RL: That’s a little bit off track from what we’re saying but . . . 14 AJ: No, I don’t think so. 15 RL: I was going to take . . . there’s a pill out now called Alvarian-something that you can take. It’s 16 enhances your breast enlargement. I was thinking about taking that, I was letting my hair grow 17 out, I was starting . . . there are three or four people here in the park, older ladies, and I get my 18 hair done, the whole nine yards. Even out . . . here I am 75 years old, and we still go out – the 19 old ladies we call ourselves, there’s three or four towns around here, one is Dunedin, and we go 20 to the clubs and, “He’s just one of the old ladies.” 21 AJ: Right. 22 RL: Which is great, in a lot of ways, but my image is of being young again and being very attractive 23 and pretty. I always thought I was a halfway good looking woman. 24 AJ: You’re beautiful, absolutely. 25 RL: I’m a retired officer in the United State Army Infantry. I’m a Ranger, by the way too. 26 AJ: A major? 27 RL: Ranger. 28 AJ: A Ranger. 29 RL: Bad ass – I’m the guy . . . a trained killer, so to speak. And yet, my whole military career I always 30 managed to find time to crossdress. 31 AJ: Wow. 32 RL: I’m in combat in Vietnam, I found a little beauty shop in downtown Saigon and the gal fixed a 33 wig and they had an ao dai it’s called, a dress. I wore it – I didn’t go anywhere but with her to a 34 big hotel downtown, it’s gone now. Played femme. Then, I was out in the field, I had a five-man Richard (Katherine) Longnecker 6 The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies University of Minnesota team. We had a friend who had a little airplane and he would fly in – it was 1 a fixed-wing spotter 2 plane, took me over to Thailand. No passport, just my military ID, dropped me off in Bangkok, 3 Thailand. For a couple hundred dollars you go into a place where you can pick the lady of your 4 choice – a massage parlor. For a couple hundred dollars, she’s yours for a week. You live with 5 her – room, board, driver anywhere. I told her I was a crossdresser – it’s very popular over in 6 Thailand. 7 AJ: Yeah, in Bangkok. 8 RL: They had me all dolled up, you can see it in the pictures there in the album. They had me all 9 dolled up and femme fatale. So, we go to a nightclub; I’m in a nightclub with her. 10 AJ: Right. 11 RL: And, her brother, who was also the driver, was also there. Who walks in the door? My 12 commanding officer. Full-bird colonel. Did not recognize me. I kind of slumped down like this 13 so I didn’t look as tall. 14 AJ: Right, so tall – yeah. 15 RL: He glanced my way several times, because I was the only American girl in the club. 16 AJ: Right. 17 RL: I gave a wave and he waved back which wasn’t very safe because then he started looking at me 18 all the time. But, we got out of there, he never did realize who I was or what I was. 19 AJ: He never knew. 20 RL: I swear about two or three weeks later, he looked at me – no recognition whatsoever. But that, 21 was a fun part. I’ve done shows. I was stationed in France for a year, was near friends. They 22 closed the depot, the depot I was working in and they had . . . 23 AJ: The train station? 24 RL: I was a radar repair man, 5th echelon. 25 AJ: OK. 26 RL: So, they closed the depot, a French depot, where the Americans did their radar repair work. 27 They sent me to Paris, France, and I had to live in Paris, France, for almost eight months – no 28 job, no nothing. They had a hotel room there for me. 29 AJ: You poor thing. 30 RL: And once a month I had to report to get my paycheck. I got very involved in Paris with 31 crossdressing. 32 AJ: Sure. 33 RL: I did a couple of shows – Moulin Rouge was one of them. 34 AJ: Really? Richard (Katherine) Longnecker 7 The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies University of Minnesota RL: But the chorus – I wasn’t prominent, I was just in the chorus line type thing, 1 which was fun. I’ve 2 done shows in Nuremberg, Germany; Munich, Germany. I got to find out who the crossdressers 3 . . . I went to crossdressing clubs . . . clubs that had crossdressing. Heidelberg, Germany. I had 4 to travel around all over the place fixing radar machines and it gave me a good chance to meet 5 people, see people, from other cultures, different languages. 6 AJ: Cultures, different walks of life. 7 RL: And get involved with their crossdressing habits. And some of them – take Sweden, Norway . . . 8 those countries, they accept it, they accept it 100%. Germany – mmm, yes and no; France, yes. 9 Here I am still . . . I was enlisted then, a sergeant – E5, but I had a good time, I enjoyed it. And 10 then once I got my commission back to the United States – Fort Benning, Georgia. 11 AJ: Fort Benning you said? 12 RL: Oh, yeah. That’s where the Ranger Battalion was. The bottom line of this is that all those 13 twenty-some years in military service, I thoroughly enjoyed my crossdressing and attempting to 14 present a female image of myself. 15 AJ: Wow, that’s fascinating. 16 RL: It was interesting. 17 AJ: Even in Vietnam. 18 RL: Even in Vietnam. I’ll show you . . . 19 AJ: Yes, we’ll get to that. I want to know . . . 20 RL: They took pictures of me in the ao dai – it’s right here. 21 AJ: Ao dai, do you know how to spell that? 22 RL: I don’t know now, but it’s a typical female dress. It’s long, down to the floor . . . 23 AJ: Kimono and then with a wraparound the waist. 24 RL: Yeah. I have no regrets about my crossdressing. I’ve enjoyed it, I made the best of it. The only 25 sad thing is is here I am, at my age, and it’s no longer the excitement level that it used to be, 26 maybe it’s the age, and the acceptance is not a problem anymore, I can care less what people 27 think. 28 AJ: Right. 29 RL: I still enjoy going over to the beauty salon, they all know me, they all have seen me get my hair 30 done, they know my situation. I couldn’t have done that 20 or 30 years ago. Back in the 1960s 31 or 1970s, if I were to go into a beauty shop, I’d have to look femme to be accepted. 32 AJ: Right. 33 RL: Otherwise, “Look at that crazy person.” Now, I can walk in like this, “Oh, hi, Richard, you getting 34 your hair done today?” I was just like all the people, the other people. Richard (Katherine) Longnecker 8 The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies University of Minnesota 1 AJ: Wow. 2 RL: My hairdresser . . . 3 AJ: The world has changed. 4 RL: Say again? 5 AJ: The world has changed. 6 RL: Yes, very much so – very much so. Did I want to change my sex? Not really. I’ve been married 7 four times – four times. Most of the time the marriages depleted because they could not accept 8 that, the crossdressing aspect of it. Yet, sexually I have no problems being male. I prefer 9 crossdressing and making love with a female. It’s almost like a lesbian relationship type thing. 10 AJ: Yeah, love connection. 11 RL: OK. I am educated enough to realize changing sex turns out not to be always what people 12 thought it was. The percentage of people that change sex and are happy is very low. There is 13 fascination about becoming a female but yet when they really are a female it’s a little different 14 than what they had anticipated. 15 AJ: Yeah. 16 RL: I’ve been happy with crossdressing. They’ve changed the names over the years so many times. 17 When I was a young person it was transvestite, transvestism. Now, I’m not even sure what all 18 the different names mean. 19 AJ: Yeah. 20 RL: Sexual transition and this and that. There’s only one place where you can get a sex change and 21 that was over in . . . Australia, I think it was, that you could get a sex change, but now it’s quite 22 frequent. 23 AJ: Yeah – prevalent pretty much everywhere. 24 RL: Yes, yes. Unfortunately . . . I’ll rephrase that word. Society accepts how we are more than they 25 did, but they still have a long ways to go. 26 AJ: Yeah, you’re right. 27 RL: Women, particularly, can’t handle a man dressing as a woman. I sometimes think maybe it’s 28 competition to them or something, there has to be something there. Some of them do accept 29 crossdressing, I’d say very low percentage do – most women are against people that crossdress. 30 Men are more acceptable now. They are accepted and don’t think about it, “Well, if that’s the 31 way he is, then that’s the way he is.” Whereas, growing up, we were prejudice – Blacks weren’t 32 even allowed to eat in restaurants with us. 33 AJ: Right. 34 RL: If you were gay, you were out. Richard (Katherine) Longnecker 9 The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies University of Minnesota AJ: 1 You were out, yeah. 2 RL: That’s changed, but still we accept homosexuality now more than we accept crossdressing or . . . 3 AJ: Transgender people, yes. 4 RL: Transgender people. And, that’s interesting. This is my own personal thoughts about it – you 5 find that if now you’re transgender or crossdressing, I’ll use that word, they automatically think 6 that you’re gay. Back in the 1950s, 1960s, if you were on stage, a drag queen, doing a show, 7 man you were straight. I mean you weren’t particularly . . . you were crossdressing, you weren’t 8 transgender or anything, it was a profession. Even in France . . . particularly in France. People, I 9 used to talk to them all the time – regular guys. 10 AJ: Yeah. 11 RS: But, they’d dress up – and beautiful . . . beautiful. Now, the only place you can find, or one of 12 the only places you can find, people that crossdress or change, are the clubs and the drag 13 queens are trying to sell their body to you rather than you appreciate their looks. They’ve even 14 closed clubs, there’s only one club left in town. There used to be several, but not anymore. You 15 go into a lesbian club crossdressed, they don’t accept you at all. Do you have any questions 16 about anything in particular? 17 AJ: I do, I’ve got a whole list of questions. I’m just listening to you. 18 RS: Fire away, fire away. 19 AJ: I really want to just start from the beginning. You were born in New York, New York, right? 20 RS: Yeah. 21 AJ: And you’ve told me a story and it’s in your book here, that your mother would dress you up as a 22 little girl. Was that your desire? So, before . . . did you want that? Or, did she want that for 23 you? 24 RS: She wanted that for me. My real father is Lord Andrew Nottich from England, he was a Lord in 25 England. 26 AJ: OK. 27 RS: My mother was a showgirl in New York City. He was visiting from England, fell in love with my 28 mother and got her pregnant so he got married to her and had me. OK? 29 AJ: OK. 30 RS: I’m two years old, he says, “The hell with this,” and goes back to England and left me, divorced 31 my mother. He was so happy to have a boy, a real stud . . . this is what I understand. 32 AJ: Right, you’re two years old. 33 RS: But, he wanted someone just like him to be a real guy. And, mother was very upset when he 34 left and that’s when she started treating me as if she had a little . . . I was her little girl then, not 35 her little boy. Crossdressing, the whole nine yards – dressed me with all the frills, all that crap. I Richard (Katherine) Longnecker 10 The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies University of Minnesota vaguely remember some of it, up until I was about six years old doing this. 1 She wanted to have 2 me grow up so I wasn’t what he wanted me to be. He wanted me to be real masculine – like 3 him. She wanted me to be like her – that’s one way of putting it. 4 AJ: Wow. 5 RS: At the age of 6, my mother re-married and he, my step-father, didn’t want any part of this living 6 the way I was living; he found out I was a guy and he said, “No, this is wrong.” So, it wasn’t easy 7 but I made it back into being a little boy. And, ever since then I’ve always had the desire to be as 8 masculine as possible, to do things that show my masculinity and not my femininity. God and 9 country, silver eagle, masonic organizations, joined the service, Ranger, become a bad guy. 10 AJ: A bad ass, you said. 11 RS: Bad ass, oh yes. I didn’t want to be that, but you’re right – bad ass, a trained killer. I have wiped 12 away many, many people. I was trained like infantry. I was there on the front lines with people, 13 I lost a lot of people, I killed a lot of people. Little sad, but that’s the reality. 14 AJ: That’s the reality of war. 15 RS: Yes, exactly. And, once you get out of war, you come home, you get out of the service, you 16 don’t want to do that anymore. So, that enhanced my desire to be a woman. I lived as a 17 woman for four or five years. 18 AJ: Really? 19 RS: After my accident. The accident, lost my eye, lost most of my leg, most of my face was 20 destroyed. Thirteen hundred stiches, they re-built the face for me. 21 AJ: Is that right? 22 RS: Part of my brain is blown apart. I had an extremely high IQ; the damage of the accident caused 23 me to have a normal IQ – otherwise I’d be in a home somewhere. They took a photo ID, my 24 Army ID card, and made a new face for me. No teeth, a lot of metal in here in my head. All the 25 more reason to want to fix myself up to look good. 26 AJ: Sure. 27 RS: And, also never going back to being a killer, never going back to the Army, to the war. I found 28 myself 100% disabled, getting all kinds of money from the military, Social Security, I didn’t need 29 to work. I’d go to the beauty shop two or three times a week if I wanted to – get dressed up. I 30 live by myself. My wife had divorced me when I had the accident, she didn’t think I’d ever make 31 it – I surprised them all, I did. So, consequently I lived that way for almost four or five years. 32 AJ: Where were you living? 33 RS: Punta Gorda, Florida. I had my own home, the whole nine yards. 34 AJ: Which? Pensacola? What was it called? 35 RS: Punta Gorda. Richard (Katherine) Longnecker 11 The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies University of Minnesota AJ: OK. I don’t think I’ve heard 1 of that part. 2 RS: It’s 100 miles south of here. It’s near Pine Island, Fort Myers, Sanibel, Captiva. 3 AJ: OK. 4 RS: Beautiful area, old-fashioned area downtown. Retired, basically. 5 AJ: A retirement community. And, you were living full time as Katherine? 6 RS: Yes, oh yes. 7 AJ: How did that feel? 8 RS: Ahh, it wasn’t as easy as it sounds. 9 AJ: Yeah, tell me about it. 10 RS: The biggest problem is the voice. I have a deep . . . when I was in Germany, I had to learn to 11 speak like an officer, I was going to Officer Candidate School. 12 AJ: Sure. 13 RS: But being femme sounding is a lot more difficult. 14 AJ: Right. 15 RS: You’re a lot more aware, with the white hair . . . it’s been that way for many, many years. My 16 beard, arm hair, leg hair was also white, that was a benefit in a way. 17 AJ: Sure. 18 RS: You don’t have to shave twice a day, you can shave . . . 19 AJ: Yeah, once. 20 RS: Let the hair grow and it’s an attractive color, a different color – so, it’s fairly attractive. It 21 attracts attention but that is also not such a good thing. You don’t want to attract attention. I 22 learned in those four or five years in crossdressing, I went from wanting to be beauty of the 23 block, the most fantastic looking woman you’ve ever seen – attractive, you learn that no, you 24 want to blend. You learn that you need to blend in with other people. 25 AJ: Right - yes. 26 RS: Even though you may go home and look like Farrah Fawcett or whatever you want to look like, 27 when you’re out on the block doing the grocery shopping and . . . 28 AJ: Yeah, you don’t want the high heels and the sparkly skirt and all that stuff. 29 RS: Girl down the street. 30 AJ: Yeah. Richard (Katherine) Longnecker 12 The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies University of Minnesota RS: You don’t want to attract attention. When you attract attention, people 1 have a tendency to 2 want to look at you and be much more critical or look for a flaws. 3 AJ: Yes. 4 RS: And, again, I’m tall, but all kinds of conversations, which I’m sure you know. 5 AJ: Yeah. 6 RS: So, you wear flats instead of . . . you wear one-inch heels rather than, you know, six-inch heels, 7 and you don’t wear a size D, you try to keep it down. 8 AJ: To a C-cup, maybe. 9 RS: And, you get a girdle that has pads that makes you look . . . 10 AJ: Right. 11 RS: What changed all that? My ex-wife. This is very crazy, but my ex-wife lives up here in St. 12 Petersburg. The house I lived in was mine, it was in my name, but she had originally purchased 13 it and built it with me. Turned out she wanted to move into a house, they needed money, they 14 wanted me to sell my house, they told me that if I moved up here to St. Petersburg, sell the 15 house, give them the money, they would give me their old house. I agreed to all of that, it was a 16 mistake, but I agreed to all that stuff. And, I’m up here, my first job I had long hair. I just pulled 17 the hair back in a little pony tail, it was damn-near down to my waist. 18 AJ: Oh, wow. 19 RS: Chamber of Commerce, John’s Pass. John’s Pass is a fantastic little area here on the water, and 20 in the middle is a little special . . . 21 AJ: It’s called Jonah’s Pass? 22 RS: John’s Pass. 23 AJ: John’s Pass. OK. 24 RS: So, here I am, you know, Chamber of Commerce, running the whole damn little show there. 25 From there, I ran all the ones on the beach – the whole Chamber of Commerce, six or seven – 26 they put me in charge of all of them. That’s when I cut the hair. I was getting too many . . . 27 AJ: Questions and . . . 28 RS: Yeah, yeah. 29 AJ: Comments. 30 RS: I wasn’t crossdressing as much and cut the hair . . . 31 AJ: Toned it down a little bit. Richard (Katherine) Longnecker 13 The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies University of Minnesota RS: Yeah, exactly. One thing led to another. I got different jobs, doing different th 1 ings and I was 2 getting older naturally. The older you get the less you really want to play around. There wasn’t 3 the acceptance here that there was down there. Tri-Ess, are you familiar with Tri-Ess? 4 AJ: I’m familiar. 5 RS: I had the Florida chapter. 6 AJ: But, can you talk about it a little bit because the people on tape might not be. So, Tri-Ess is a . . . 7 RS: Tri-Ess is a group of basically crossdressers, married . . . heterosexuals. Basically, the Tri-Ess is a 8 group . . . you have meetings where you get together monthly, bi-monthly, however you want to 9 do it. Both the husband and the wife together as a group. 10 AJ: OK. 11 RS: The men and the women, so they blend together and the woman becomes more acceptable to 12 how her husband is. We had a chapter down in Fort Myers, I had 50 or 60 people. So, ironically, 13 most of the crossdressers in town, I got to know because I was . . . I ended up I was with them 14 four or five years and then I got to be president of the whole damn thing, only because I had a 15 house out in the country and it was easier to have them come meet me out in the country. 16 AJ: Instead of finding a place in the city where . . . 17 RS: The only other one here in Florida was one here in Tampa and there’s one in Orlando, and I was 18 the other one. The Gamma Tri Beta. 19 AJ: Gamma Tri Beta. 20 RS: I have a portfolio there too if you want to see it, but Gamma Tri Beta. Just a group of guys who 21 came together as girls. They didn’t want to socialize as much. Now, over the years, the Tri-Ess 22 has kind of diminished a little bit in its volume. You have too many individuals that want to 23 change their sex, transsexuals. Again, I’m not sure about terminology . . . 24 AJ: Yeah, transgender – yeah. 25 RS: But, they have problems with the Tri-Ess because here with the Tri-Ess, we’re trying to get the 26 woman to accept the fact that their husband just wants to dress pretty and not attract men, but 27 yet these guys want to change their sex . . . a conflict. 28 AJ: It was a conflict, yeah. 29 RS: A big conflict. And this, maybe, is the reason why it’s diminished a lot. I haven’t checked them 30 in a while. 31 AJ: I think that may be a part of it; I think the internet now has . . . people don’t have to go out to 32 the country. They can just go online; they can just stay in their houses. 33 RS: That’s a very, very good point. Now, you can buy anything, do anything, see anything, talk about 34 anything you want right on the internet. Richard (Katherine) Longnecker 14 The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies University of Minnesota AJ: Yeah, so I think that’s a big part of it. I think there’s more acceptance so also 1 people don’t have 2 to hide as much. 3 RS: People are still . . . I guess everything is different though. In their mind it’s different. 4 AJ: Do you have any children? 5 RS: No, no. 6 AJ: No. 7 RS: Real quick story. Marriage number one, special services girl in Germany, Sue Murray. I went to 8 Officer Candidate School, graduated, became a 2nd Lieutenant, she lives in Denver, Colorado. 9 She didn’t like the Army at all, didn’t want to stay in the Army. I only had two years of obligation 10 as an officer; we go to Denver, Colorado, and she divorces me because I want to go back in the 11 service. Ironically, at the same time, I get recalled back to service due to Vietnam. So, I was 12 working as a design engineer at Gates Rubber Company in Denver, Colorado, and never was too 13 excited about my first wife. We never had a good sexual relationship at all. I had a beautiful 14 portrait made of me in Paris, France, and she destroyed it because she was afraid . . . and also 15 kind of hid all of her stuff. She destroyed anything of mine that represented myself as other 16 than male. 17 AJ: As a woman. 18 RS: That pissed me off, so the relationship was not that good. So, I go to Fort Benning, Georgia. I 19 reported to Fort Benning and they’re going to ship me to . . . they were going to form a division 20 of soldiers at Fort Riley, Kansas. So, who shows up? My secretary from Denver, Colorado. “Oh, 21 Richard, I’m pregnant.” “Oh, Jesus . . .” She wasn’t, but I believed she was. 22 AJ: Your secretary? So, you were having an affair with the secretary? 23 RS: Yeah. 24 AJ: OK, all right. 25 RS: So, and I wasn’t getting along with Sue, we got divorced. So, here I am, my secretary shows up, 26 Lynette. Interesting. We, ironically, I married her right away, believed she was pregnant. 27 Bought her a house on base there, set her all up, shipped out to Vietnam – we had a little group 28 there that went to ‘Nam. Every month I sent all my money, everything I had coming in. R & R in 29 Hawaii, no problems – we had a great time, everything was fine. She was also aware of my 30 crossdressing from way back when we were in Denver, and this follows where her and I are 31 together where she dresses me up and we’d go out. Get back home, she was gone. She had 32 been living with a guy all this time, she was just using me, so to speak. That was wife number 33 two. The whole thing was a game with her – she wasn’t pregnant, she took all my money, the 34 whole nine yards. 35 AJ: Disappeared. 36 RS: So, then wife number three. I was stationed up at Fort Meade, Maryland, a logistics officer for a 37 13-state area. I was a captain or a major then . . . yeah, a captain. I fell in love with another girl, Richard (Katherine) Longnecker 15 The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies University of Minnesota married Priscilla Peabody. Priscilla was a beautiful, beautiful woman. I met 1 her by looking for 2 someone that would teach me make-up. 3 AJ: OK, how to apply it and do all that stuff? 4 RS: Yes. We just got together more and more and leisurely fell in love. She was very aware of my 5 make-up plan. She had four kids – two boys, two girls. So, here I am up there with her and 6 doing very, very well, and all of a sudden the Army has to release us from active duty, they had 7 no more money to pay us. The only officers they kept were West Point – no OCS or ROTC. A 8 significant . . . I was what they called volunteer death. I was an officer the rest of my life. They 9 paid us a large sum of money and took us off of active duty. All right. I paid off the house we 10 were living in with her four kids. She was a good Catholic girl. We’d been married about . . . 11 maybe a year and towards the end of the year, I paid off the mortgage. I wanted to adopt the 12 kids, she said no, let’s not do that - they’d leave their name Peabody. I came home from work 13 one day . . . well, I got to work, I was working at Johns Hopkins Hospital – I redesigned the linen 14 distribution system for about seven hospitals in Baltimore. I came home one night and was 15 evicted from the house – me personally, all kinds of crazy reasons she gave. She got back with 16 her husband of the four children. So, to make a long story short, I left Maryland and came here 17 to Florida. I decided to become an artist; I paint on the side a little bit. So, I had a little store in 18 downtown Punta Gorda, a very old, old building that had no plumbing. My plumbing was a 19 vacuum cleaner hose from the toilet on the second floor down to the ground. Got condemned 20 after a while. Little bar around the corner, a little nightclub, a stripper club around the corner. 21 I’m sitting there one night at the bar and having a few drinks, eating. A beautiful woman walks 22 in the door – wow. Erica, German girl. One seat in the whole place – next to me. 23 AJ: Oh, wow. 24 RS: I said, “Well, what do you do?” She’s a stripper next door. “Oh, I’m an artist up here.” She said, 25 “Have you ever seen my show?” “No, I don’t go in there.” “Why don’t you come over and see 26 the show.” So, I waited that night until about 2 or 2:30, she was off-duty, took her back to my 27 apartment to show her my artwork. We were together the next 16 years. 28 AJ: Wow. 29 RS: All that time. Loved that woman. She was bi-sexual. She accepted my crossdressing; that 30 replaced her desire for a woman. It worked out very, very well. 31 AJ: Perfect - yeah, that’s like a good combination. 32 RS: She was good at make-up. There’s a picture of us both in here. We’d go out all over the place 33 dressed as woman. She was a knock-out herself – wow. But, she never again . . . every night, 34 we were together the whole time, all those years. She was a stripper so . . . I closed my little art 35 studio down and we went on the road. We traveled all over the United States. We developed a 36 magic show for her, “Mysteria and the Magic Machine.” 37 AJ: Mysteria? Richard (Katherine) Longnecker 16 The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies University of Minnesota RS: Mysteria M-y-s-t-e-r-i-a. Mysteria and the Magic Machine. Three 1 m’s – MMM. And, she 2 turned out to be the show, a showgirl, but totally nude. You take off your G-string, it turns into 3 a cane; you pull a rabbit out of your . . . you know, the whole nine yards. 4 AJ: Right, exactly. 5 RS: Together we developed a show for her. We got married, by the way, and we traveled around. 6 She does the show – one week, two weeks, she’d make maybe a grand, a grand and a half. 7 AJ: Yeah, you can make good money. 8 RS: Good money, yeah. So, we ended up in Fort Lauderdale at the Sheer 3, one of the only totally 9 nude nightclubs. And, I became a disc jockey and she’s doing one-night a week . . . one show a 10 night. She ran all the other 18 girls that were the strippers. 11 AJ: Oh, wow. 12 RS: Well, it progressed to where I ended up managing the God-damn place and I would get a 13 percentage of whatever gross the strippers made, and they’d walk away with $200, $300, $400 14 a night. Three stages I ran, two girls on each stage. They’d come out for four songs, they’d start 15 taking it off. Anytime a guy in the audience picks one, she’d come down . . . tabletops, slides up 16 on his table, totally nude and makes some money. Their tips were $100 bills. But anyhow, we 17 left there and moved back to Punta Gorda and that’s where I had the accident. 18 AJ: Oh, boy. 19 RS: Today, Erica and I are best friends. She married a big-wig out of MacDill Air Force Base, the 20 equivalent of a general. But, he had a stroke and the whole side of his body is paralyzed. He 21 was in the hospital for over a year and after he got out of the hospital, they let him come back 22 to MacDill and work, so he could retire and get his retirement – big bucks. I’m the one who 23 drove him – this van right here has lifts in the back of it. I’d take him to MacDill in the morning, 24 drive home. MacDill is about an hour’s drive from here. In the evening - pick him up, bring him 25 back home. He finally gave me the van. But, I’m saying this because they live in a fancy place 26 downtown here, but they’re my closest friends. He and my wife; she worries about him, we 27 take care of him. 28 AJ: Yes, she’s your friend, she’s your . . . yeah. 29 RS: Exactly. She was the head of a friendly native beach resort in Sea Towers down here by the 30 water, a big condo unit. She went to school, became in charge of all that. So no one knows 31 what she was . . . 32 AJ: Except for you. 33 RS: Yeah. So, she has a tendency to tell me to keep my mouth shut. So, that’s basically . . . I’ve had 34 a habit of collecting pictures, I have tons of pictures of me. I enjoy having pictures taken. I’m 35 giving you a photo album to share with you because when I’m gone, I’m 75 now, so when I’m 36 gone, what’s going to happen – it’s going to end up in the trash somewhere. I’d rather you pass 37 it on to share . . . Richard (Katherine) Longnecker 17 The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies University of Minnesota AJ: To share with the 1 rest of the world, yeah. 2 RS: For other people, and that’s why you’re getting it. 3 AJ: I really appreciate it, Richard. So, it sounds like being a crossdresser hasn’t really affected your 4 professional life or your military life. You crossdressed when you were in Vietnam and Paris and 5 Nuremberg, but it does seem like it has affected your marital life. Do you want to talk about 6 that a little bit? If it’s too painful, we don’t have to, but . . . 7 RS: I was born a male gender. We don’t have a choice of what we were born, we’re stuck with that. 8 AJ: Right, even though some people say now the language is assigned male at birth, right, because 9 we don’t have any control over how we were born. Ever since I can remember I felt like a 10 woman. 11 RS: Yes. 12 AJ: But, the doctors said I was a boy. 13 RS: Yes, I can see where there’s problems if you don’t have the genitals of that particular gender or 14 there’s variations. I have my own theories, they’re all from left field, but you physically . . . your 15 gender is determined by your physical – what you’re born with. 16 AJ: Appearance, yes. 17 RS: For the next growing up period, five or six years OK, that’s when you either become male or 18 female – you’re trained that way. We treat little girls different than little boys. 19 AJ: Absolutely. 20 RS: So, we treat a little boy like he’s a little girl and then all of a sudden he has to become a boy to 21 be with society. If society accepts him any other way, he’d probably continue living as a girl. In 22 my case, I felt, “If I’m a boy, I have to prove I’m a boy. I liked good looking hair, I liked doing this 23 . . .” So, no. Women, you talk about relationships with women, I had my first encounter 24 sexually with a woman when I went to college the first year – on the golf course. Tina Marie. 25 We had our first . . . we were both virgins, I guess. Her father was a preacher but that’s . . . I’ll 26 never forget that. It was exciting; I did what I felt . . . no, that’s the wrong way to say it. I did 27 naturally what my gender I identified myself as . . . 28 AJ: Right, yes – exactly. 29 RS: I enjoyed sex; I wasn’t a fanatic about going out and doing it. I appreciated women for what 30 they were; I wish I were a woman, but never to the point where I wanted to become a woman 31 instead of a male. 32 AJ: Sure. 33 RS: It turns out that I was probably a better lover than a lot of men only because I researched pretty 34 much women . . . women like it slower, there’s all kinds of things they like a little differently 35 than a man – wam, bam, thank you, ma’am. Richard (Katherine) Longnecker 18 The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies University of Minnesota 1 AJ: Right. 2 RS: I picked the wrong women. I picked women that I thought were accepting that I was a half-and-3 half person. I enjoyed doing this, Sue didn’t. Lynette did, but that turned out to be a joke to get 4 my money. I married Priscilla, accepted – she was a make-up artist. She enjoyed the money for 5 her kids. 6 AJ: And, she was still in love with her husband. 7 RS: Now, you take Erica. Erica was more of a real relationship because . . . well, she was bi-sexual, 8 to a certain point. 9 AJ: She enjoyed women and she appreciated the woman inside of you. 10 RS: Yes, and she lost that attractiveness for having a woman and identified me as the woman with 11 her. But yet we had sex normally. She was damn good in bed. 12 AJ: Yeah. 13 RS: Does that kind of help you a little bit. 14 AJ: Yeah, no – it’s your answer. I’m not looking for a specific answer, but it’s great. It absolutely 15 makes sense. 16 RS: What I’ve learned, in my opinion – I have my own opinion. There are so many variations of this 17 crossdressing, OK. It can be identification of what you think you should have been or what you 18 want to be or you are, all reasons why some guys want to change their sex – well, women want 19 to change their sex too. But, I mean, there’s so many variations, so many reasons. I’ve come to 20 one conclusion, I’m going to pass this on to you just so you know, OK. 21 AJ: All right. 22 RS: You don’t need to . . . you can erase this if you have to. I’m looking for a common denominator 23 in my life of why I enjoyed crossdressing, why I enjoyed the female image, and I finally came to a 24 conclusion that has to do with sexual arousal. 25 AJ: OK. 26 RS: You want to play with yourself. 27 AJ: Masturbate. 28 RS: Yes, I was looking for the word . . . masturbation is very good. That all is based on different 29 variations of masturbation. Now, you can have a sex change and you still have your organs and 30 you may still have feelings in there, but it’s just . . . I don’t know. As you grow older, your need 31 for sexual gratification is not as predominant as it was and you lose interest; and as you lose 32 interest, you also lose the interest in your appearance and your preference in gender. I hope 33 someday we come to a point where unisex . . . it makes no difference how you look, it makes no 34 difference how you feel and physically you use what you were born with. 35 AJ: Right. Richard (Katherine) Longnecker 19 The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies University of Minnesota RS: But, no 1 gender identification. 2 AJ: I love that – that’s the world we’re trying to create, Richard. 3 RS: I believe that. And, I hope it happens. 4 AJ: I think it will eventually, I really do. 5 RS: It’s not as fast as we’d like it to be. I think I said this to you before, we are accepting of 6 homosexuality more than we ever did 100 years ago. 7 AJ: Oh, yes, absolutely. 8 RS: We still haven’t gotten that far with transgenderism. 9 AJ: But, it’s getting better. 10 RS: Oh, yes it is – but not good enough yet. 11 AJ: What do you think about Caitlyn Jenner? 12 RS: About what? 13 AJ: Caitlyn Jenner. Do you know who Caitlyn is? 14 RS: No. 15 AJ: So, Caitlyn Jenner, a transsexual woman, a transgender woman, she was formerly Bruce Jenner. 16 RS: Yes . . . OK, yes, yes. 17 AJ: And, finally came out after 65 years. 18 RS: Yes. And now, you don’t have to do that. Now, well . . . 19 AJ: Now children are getting hormones at 6 years old and 12 years old. 20 RS: Little kids are using the computer faster than us. 21 AJ: Yeah. 22 RS: I do believe we’re having a serious problem. I’d be surprised if we lasted another 10 years in 23 this country. We need population control, we have to control the population – it’s as simple as 24 that. We have to have birth control, we have to have all kinds of control. Not that you can’t 25 have children, when you’re born you have to temporarily be assigned certain things – there 26 should be certain social, economic, mental, physical requirements, we have to have that. 27 Population control is the answer in my opinion. 28 AJ: Really? Wow, well they’re doing away with population control. They’re getting rid of Planned 29 Parenthood and all of these things that do sort of help people control population – that’s going 30 away. 31 RS: We’ve existed on this planet so long because there are controls – war is a control, population 32 control. Famine, all sorts of things are . . . we have altered the face of the earth. I did a college Richard (Katherine) Longnecker 20 The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies University of Minnesota thesis on this one time . . . I forget now the statistics, but if we populate 1 at the rate we’re 2 populating now, there wouldn’t be one square foot for everyone or enough room for everyone 3 to live in the year 2090 or something like that. We have to . . . we’re not progressing fast 4 enough for other environments as we are population. We pay women to have more kids. China 5 has done well. Why? They have basically population control. Mexico is going to be another 6 problem . . . this is another whole subject. 7 AJ: Yeah. A little off topic but interesting nonetheless. 8 RS: Now, how that affects genderism, I don’t know. If we lived in the 1940s and we were in Europe, 9 all three of us . . . two of us, one of us, however many people, would be destroyed. 10 AJ: Let me ask you this. You’re speaking of the 1940s and 1950s . . . well, you were born in 1942, 11 right? 12 RS: Yes. I grew up in the 1950s. 13 AJ: You grew up in the 1950s. So, Christine Jorgensen . . . 14 RS: Oh, yes – oh, yes. 15 AJ: . . . came out in the 1950s. How did that . . . did that have any effect on you personally and 16 what was it? 17 RS: Oh, yes. 18 AJ: You were still in high school at the time, right? 19 RS: “Wow, someone else has the same problem I have.” I knew of no other crossdressers, I 20 assumed it was just me. 21 AJ: Right. 22 RS: And when Jorgensen did what she did, I was fascinated and enthralled by it, but as I watched it 23 progress, I saw it wasn’t worth it to change your sex because of the notoriety and potential 24 problems, so I . . . but, I was very aware of it. 25 AJ: Yeah. 26 RS: Not jealous, but interested. 27 AJ: Sure. 28 RS: That’s when I first started researching gender change, that was the initial reason for that. There 29 were so many different doctors and psychologists that have interpreted crossdressing through 30 the years. I researched everything I could find and made the decision that no, I don’t 31 particularly want to change my gender, I just want to change my appearance. 32 AJ: Right, right – so, a very thoughtful process for you. I mean, you really thought through it and . . . 33 and you were open with your partners too, right? 34 RS: Yes – oh, yes. Richard (Katherine) Longnecker 21 The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies University of Minnesota AJ: You told your partners what 1 was going on and . . . 2 RS: Yes, yes. I still reflect back . . . I enjoyed being in a beauty parlor with my mother and them fixing 3 me to look just like her. I liked that image. 4 AJ: Yeah. 5 RS: And yet, as the years progressed, I became more and more distant from my mother in that area. 6 My father, I made aware of my crossdressing. 7 AJ: Really? 8 RS: Yes. My father happened . . . 9 AJ: Your biological father – in London? 10 RS: No, I never knew the Lord. 11 AJ: OK, your stepfather. 12 RS: My stepfather. I changed my name to Longnecker. George Longnecker was the inventor of the 13 gyroscope. He had two doctorate degrees – one from MIT and one from New York University, 14 my stepfather. 15 AJ: Wow. 16 RS: My mother died; I moved my father in to take care of him with me. OK. I’m still crossdressing 17 with him living there, so I made him aware, “Yes, dad, this is me.” He accepted it. He accepted 18 it from . . . a knowledgeable point, an educated point, not particularly, “Oh, you’re some 19 weirdo.” But why, you know. He said, “Yeah, it goes back to when you were just a little kid, I 20 guess.” But, anyhow, we had meetings – Tri-Ess meetings with my father there. 21 AJ: Really? 22 RS: He didn’t participate naturally but . . . 23 AJ: But, he was at home. 24 RS: He was aware . . . he was aware. I never kept my feeling away from any woman. Three or four 25 women here in the park – very, very close to . . . very, very close to. I’m past the physical 26 attraction stage; I can’t get an erection anymore, but . . . 27 AJ: Well, you know, they do have some pills for that. 28 RS: Well, yeah, but I don’t want . . . 29 AJ: If you want to there’s Cialis and Viagra and . . . 30 RS: But, those women know me, they’ve seen these albums, they know. Normally . . . I’m vice 31 president of the God-damn association. 32 AJ: So, you’re active, you’re involved. Richard (Katherine) Longnecker 22 The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies University of Minnesota RS: Oh, yes, yes – but it’s all very male-image type of thing. There’s old ladies 1 here that couldn’t 2 handle this. The woman across the street will be 100 years old next month. 3 AJ: Is that right? 4 RS: Last year she was still driving around. I’m making a point that your older women, they’re living 5 in the past, they don’t accept things. The younger girls, they accept it. 6 AJ: Oh, yeah. 7 RS: It’s still not something you do in public here in the park because it’s a close-knit society. Any 8 other good questions for me? 9 AJ: You know, I feel like we have really covered a lot. I’m wondering, is there anything more that 10 you would like to share? 11 RS: Ahh, now I assume from our conversation and our meetings earlier, that you’ve had a sex 12 change, you’re female all the way. 13 AJ: Yes. 14 RS: Are you happy you did that? Unhappy you did that? Have you had problems because of doing 15 that? I identified you right away as a female, you look the part. But, how do you feel about it? 16 AJ: OK, I’m just going to say this . . . because this is your interview and I don’t want to mix it up with 17 my own, but I have not been happier in my entire life. 18 RS: What? 19 AJ: I have not been happier in my entire life. 20 RS: Yes, OK. I would say that that would be the exception rather than the norm. Is that valid or 21 not? 22 AJ: You know, I think . . . so, when people say they’ve had a sex change and they’re not . . . I think a 23 lot of it is they’re not necessarily happy with the surgery. There’s a difference – like, they’re not 24 happy with the surgery but they’re happy in their life. They’re happier being out than being in 25 the closet; they’re happier being true to other people than they are lying to other people. 26 Because, when you’re in the closet you’re hiding yourself from people and that’s a painful 27 feeling internally. 28 RS: It’s disturbing to me to find . . . maybe I have interpreted this incorrectly, but it’s disturbing to 29 find that right now if I want a sex change, I can go to damn near anywhere in the world and get a 30 sex change. It used to be you had to live that way for a year as a woman and you had to go 31 through long stages before you had a change; I don’t think that’s the same now as it was. 32 AJ: No, it’s a little different . . . it’s a lot different. 33 RS: That has to be bad now, whereas maybe good in your case. 34 AJ: You know, I don’t know. I kind of think people really should be clear that that’s . . . because it is 35 a dramatic change in life. So, it’s not something you should just wake up one day and say, “Hey, Richard (Katherine) Longnecker 23 The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies University of Minnesota I think I should get my body cut on today.” I think you really have 1 to be self-aware and 2 understand. I think a big piece of that to me, and this is just me – I’m speaking personally, is 3 really getting some assistance from a psychologist or a psychiatrist to help you think through 4 these things and really make sure that you’re not schizophrenic, you’re not multiple 5 personalities, you’re not . . . because those things are real too, that’s a real thing. But, honestly, 6 and I appreciate the question and we can maybe talk about it afterwards, after the interview, 7 but I just don’t want to mix up my interview with your interview. Does that make sense? 8 RS: One more quick question for you then, my last question to you. 9 AJ: OK. 10 RS: I have tons of pictures and things from when I was femme. 11 AJ: Yeah. 12 RS: Do I burn them, do I throw them away now before I’m dead, or do I find a psychiatrist 13 somewhere and say, “Hey, this is me, does this help you in any way in your lessons or teaching 14 something?” What do I do? What do I do with all this stuff? 15 AJ: All right, you give them to me . . . no, honestly. I work at an archive that is really trying to 16 document and preserve transgender history, crossdressers, gay, lesbian and bisexual. So, I 17 would love to have that. If you don’t want to give it to me, I think you should give it to some 18 professor, some school somewhere. 19 RS: So, you’re saying that if I decide, because I’m in the later years of my life – I almost died last 20 week, I can pack up all my stuff and send it to you and you would do what’s best with it? 21 AJ: Absolutely. 22 RS: In other words, I’d hate to burn it all up. 23 AJ: I really hope you don’t burn it all up. 24 RS: Even in this book, I’ve got . . . just as an example, there’s a couple of pictures in here . . . it’s 25 never where you want it . . . anyhow, there’s . . . oh, here they are. These are crossdressers, 26 they were not homosexuals, they’re not sex changes, this was their profession. 27 AJ: Right, that’s what they did for a living. 28 RS: As a living, OK. And, the point is, all their pictures and everything, and I have tons of pictures 29 like this too, what happens? 30 AJ: What happens to them, right. 31 RS: They need, like you just said, to be at least a group where they can be maybe someday 32 worthwhile to something. 33 AJ: Yeah, right. I would deeply appreciate that. 34 RS: I’ll do that, no question about it. Richard (Katherine) Longnecker 24 The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies University of Minnesota AJ: And, I think that we all have to help to create inspirational ideas for other 1 people on how they 2 live their life. You have lived a remarkable life and I want to say Katherine, but I also know 3 Richard is what you go by. 4 RS: I don’t want to impress on the people, I just want to help other people with some of the rough 5 spots I’ve had. 6 AJ: Exactly. 7 RS: If that means anything. 8 AJ: Yes, no – it means a great deal. I’m fascinated by your life. I’m really happy that you have . . . 9 RS: Does mean that we’re calling it quits. 10 AJ: We’re getting there – pretty close. But I do just want to say on camera, man, I’m really happy 11 that you had Erica and you still have Erica in your life. That is amazing. 12 RS: We’re not meant to live alone, we have to have a partner – whether we’re married to that 13 partner, whether it’s male or female – who cares, we have to have a partner. 14 AJ: Absolutely. And, I’m so happy that you found that. 15 RS: I had it. My partner at one time was a Great Dane, called her Princess Davina, but they don’t 16 last that long. 17 AJ: Yeah, they don’t last that long. Richard, nee Katherine, thank you so much for your time today. 18 I really appreciate it. 19 RS: I hope to share something that other people can at least get something out of my experience 20 and go from there. 21 AJ: I think you have. Thank you for your service to our country as well. 22 RS: Again, as you are. 23 AJ: As you are.
