Gavin Rouille 1 The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies University of Minnesota Gavin Rouille Narrator Andrea Jenkins Interviewer The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies University of Minnesota November 3, 2015 The Transgender Oral History Project of the Upper Midwest will empower individuals to tell their story, while providing students, historians, and the public with a more rich foundation of primary source material about the transgender community. The project is part of the Tretter Collection at the University of Minnesota. The archive provides a record of GLBT thought, knowledge and culture for current and future generations and is available to students, researchers and members of the public. The Transgender Oral History Project will collect up to 400 hours of oral histories involving 200 to 300 individuals over the next three years. Major efforts will be the recruitment of individuals of all ages and experiences, and documenting the work of The Program in Human Sexuality. This project will be led by Andrea Jenkins, poet, writer, and trans-activist. Andrea brings years of experience working in government, non-profits and LGBT organizations. If you are interested in being involved in this exciting project, please contact Andrea. Andrea Jenkins jenki120@umn.edu (612) 625-4379 Gavin Rouille 3 The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies University of Minnesota Andrea 1 Jenkins -AJ 2 Gavin Rouille -GR 3 4 AJ: Well, hello. My name is Andrea Jenkins and I am the oral historian with the Transgender Oral 5 History Project. I’m here today with Gavin Rouille. Today is November 3, 2015 – wow, we’re 6 already into November, and it is the absolute most stunning today. It’s 70 degrees, the sun is 7 shining. Gavin, why don’t you state your name and pronounce it the way you do. Tell us your 8 gender identity, your gender assigned at birth, and what are your preferred pronouns. 9 GR: My name is Gavin Laurence Rouille. I am male, born female at birth, FTM, and prefer male 10 pronouns. 11 AJ: All right, great. So, Gavin, can you just talk a little bit about your earliest memory? What’s the 12 first thing you remember in your life? It doesn’t have to be related to your trans identity, 13 though if it is, that would be great. 14 GR: Well, I think it is one of my more vivid first memories, I think the first memory I had was chasing 15 my cat down the driveway and falling. I was wearing a Mickey Mouse jumpsuit and I scratched a 16 hole in the knee and I was very sad. 17 AJ: Oh, wow. 18 GR: But, one of my first memories was from elementary school and the teacher was splitting the 19 class into male and female for health discussions and I was quite a tomboy growing up. I really 20 felt like I didn’t know which side of the room I was supposed to be on. I remember struggling 21 with those kind of situations, but that was one of my oldest memories. 22 AJ: Where did you go to school? Where did you grow up? 23 GR: Burlington, Vermont. 24 AJ: OK, so pretty rural? Or, I guess Burlington is the biggest city in Vermont, but it’s smaller than 25 most cities though. 26 GR: Yes, this is true. 27 AJ: And, your elementary school was in Burlington? 28 GR: Well, South Burlington. 29 AJ: What was school like? You mentioned that you had these sort of struggles and challenges 30 around where to line up for lunch or recess and all of these kinds of things, but did you 31 experience any sort of bullying or any sort of adverse stuff in school? 32 GR: I don’t remember much of school. I feel like I pushed a lot of that out. I was very quiet, I 33 remember just being really shy and not communicating a whole lot with people. The only 34 bullying I received, I think, was in high school that I can really remember. I just remember 35 walking around, there was this circle loop between the lobby and the library, and I was walking Gavin Rouille 4 The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies University of Minnesota around after school and these middle schoolers were following me and 1 one of them said, “I 2 didn’t know there was transvestites in our school.” At that time, I didn’t even identify as 3 transgender so I was really shocked by the experience. 4 AJ: Wow. 5 GR: I did confront them, which felt really good and empowering but it was a very scary moment. 6 AJ: And they backed away or . . .? 7 GR: Yeah, nothing else came of it, but yeah, that was my most vivid real bullying in high school. 8 AJ: What was your home life like for you? Do you have many brothers and sisters? 9 GR: Two blood sisters. My parents divorced when I was four and both of them got remarried around 10 the time that I was 12 and so I gained some step-siblings. Only one side of them do I really 11 know, so I gained two step-sisters and a step-brother that I’m close to. I came out a lot – I came 12 out as lesbian, bisexual, and then . . . 13 AJ: As which kind of sexual? 14 GR: Bisexual, and then lesbian again, and then queer and then transgender and then back to lesbian. 15 And then eventually back to transgender, and then bisexual again. 16 AJ: So, how do you identify today? 17 GR: Transgender and bisexual. 18 AJ: Transgender, bi . . . 19 GR: Queer. 20 AJ: And, that has morphed though up and down over time. 21 GR: Definitely. 22 AJ: The fluidity of gender and identity. 23 GR: Yes. 24 AJ: So, home life was just pretty basic, pretty normal? 25 GR: I’m very blessed. I had a very accepting family, for the most part. I think my dad struggled more 26 with my lesbian identity than my trans identity, and my mom struggled more with my trans 27 identity than my lesbian identity. 28 AJ: Wow, that’s interesting. 29 GR: Yeah. It took me a while to come out. I came out to my mom every time pretty much right as 30 soon as I kind of was able to put words to what was going on. But, I was much more afraid of 31 coming out to my dad – more so because he had expressed some pretty clear homophobic 32 views when I was a child. Vermont was the first state to ever pass civil unions and I remember 33 watching that on the news, when it happened, at my grandmother’s house with my dad. My Gavin Rouille 5 The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies University of Minnesota grandmother is very religious, was, and my dad was very drunk and he said 1 something about the 2 faggots on TV. 3 AJ: Oh, wow. 4 GR: And my grandmother said, “Well, if you don’t pray for them, you’re just as bad as they are.” So, 5 from that moment on, when that happened I was like 11 or something, I knew that it may not 6 be safe to be out with that side of my family – though that shifted drastically as I grew older and 7 became closer to my dad. 8 AJ: Oh, wow – that’s great. What kind of challenges have you faced since expressing your true 9 gender identity? 10 GR: Well, as a white guy I kind of moved up the social ladder. 11 AJ: Yeah, that’s a real sort of reality. 12 GR: Definitely. 13 AJ: What is that like? 14 GR: Well, as a person who has always identified as a feminist and always really been aware of 15 patriarchy and privilege, I think becoming a white man really scared me. I don’t know . . . I’m 16 still working on that. I’m still trying to navigate how I feel about that. I mean it is what it is, but 17 it definitely is a shift in identity that I struggle with. 18 AJ: How long have you been out? When did you come out? 19 GR: I started officially transitioning in 2009, but had come out . . . I changed my name to Gavin, not 20 legally but started going by Gavin when I was 15, so that was 12 or 13 years ago. 21 AJ: So, you’re 26? 22 GR: Twenty-seven, I’m almost 28. 23 AJ: So, you’ve been out for quite some time. 24 GR: Yes. 25 AJ: To the extent that you are comfortable, tell me about any medical interventions that you have 26 undertaken or that you plan to engage in. 27 GR: I’ve only been on hormones so far and hopefully getting top surgery within the next few weeks. 28 AJ: Oh, wow. Surgery. 29 GR: Yes. 30 AJ: That’s pretty intense. That’s a big step down the road. 31 GR: Yes, a long time coming. Gavin Rouille 6 The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies University of Minnesota AJ: And hormones, I mean . . . you say, “I’ve only been taking hormones,” but that’s 1 a pretty big 2 medical intervention too. 3 GR: It is, definitely. 4 AJ: How did you feel once you started on testosterone? 5 GR: I didn’t feel much of a difference. I definitely had seen documentaries of other people who like 6 immediately when they stuck the needle in were just like, “Ahh,” and had this immediate . . . 7 AJ: Machismo. 8 GR: Yeah. I didn’t have that. I didn’t feel great shifts in personality or . . . well, I guess . . . I always 9 struggled with whether or not life was based on nature or nurture and I’ve definitely come to 10 terms that it’s just both because previous to taking hormones, I would never have imagined 11 saying or acting on sexual impulses towards friends or partners. And then, once starting 12 testosterone, sometimes I just had these instincts to slap a girl’s butt, and I’m like, “That’s not 13 appropriate.” It was very strange to have those types of feelings. 14 AJ: Like a stranger, just walking down the street smacking girls on the ass? 15 GR: No, no – not strangers. But, more like friends and partners, being more . . . just a lot more 16 sexual and not really filtering immediately whether things were appropriate or not. I don’t 17 know. It’s interesting. 18 AJ: And there were, of course, physical changes? 19 GR: Yeah. It took a while for some things. I was on the wrong testosterone for quite a few years, 20 the generic just didn’t work for me. But, I was so distracted with school that I didn’t notice that I 21 kind of had plateaued for two or three years. So, now I’m back on stuff that actually works for 22 me. 23 AJ: Wow, OK. 24 GR: So, just in the last year I’ve seen a lot of growth in facial hair whereas I feel like after . . . I don’t 25 know, what has it been? Seven years on testosterone? I should have a full beard. 26 AJ: Oh, wow. Yeah. 27 GR: That would be my preference. 28 AJ: Really? The hipster look. 29 GR: Well, I don’t necessarily want to grow it all out, but I want that ability. 30 AJ: Sure. Well, congratulations on your impending surgery. I hope everything goes well. 31 GR: Thank you. 32 AJ: Good healing vibes to you. What have been some of the positive aspects of expressing your 33 true gender identity? Gavin Rouille 7 The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies University of Minnesota GR: I think it’s really helped me to be able to connect with people of many different 1 walks of life and 2 really see a lot more of the world from different perspectives, actual aid in understanding . . . or 3 at least be more willing to understand other people because of my experiences of not being 4 understood. So, even my experiences with my family and watching them grow from my 5 experiences and choices and things they’ve chosen to participate in because of that. I can see a 6 lot of positivity in that and many of the people I interact with, whether it’s through my work at a 7 homeless youth shelter or as an artist who makes personal work about my transition and being 8 able to share that with people, and educate people. Yeah, it’s been really useful in those ways. 9 AJ: What kind of art do you make? 10 GR: I’m a print maker, a trained print maker, but I do a lot of multimedia stuff as well. I’ve dabbled 11 in installations and sculptures, to a degree, but mostly print making. 12 AJ: OK. Does your work take any sort of social justice track too or is it sort of art for the beauty of 13 making art? 14 GR: No, I’m the type that doesn’t believe art needs or should be beautiful. 15 AJ: OK. 16 GR: Art is extremely powerful and can really be used as a tool for many, many different things. I 17 often use the example that Hitler was well known for banning a lot of art and stealing art 18 because he knew the power of it. 19 AJ: Sure, wow. 20 GR: So, I try to make things that really say something, that’s more of my preference and it’s more of 21 what I’m attracted to. Not that I have problems with art for beauty’s sake, but my art is . . . well, 22 as I have changed and grown, my art has really followed that progress with me. But, it really 23 started when I first came out and I was using it as a tool to kind of echo my transition and my 24 thoughts and feelings, who I wanted to be, what I wanted to do, what did gender mean to me. 25 And so, there was a lot of coming out pieces and once I kind of was out, I started to research 26 more about the transgender community at large, what it meant to be transgender in this world 27 – past, present, possibly future. And, a lot of the information that I found out was really scary 28 and I started making work about a lot of the research I was finding or the things I was 29 researching about the murders of transgender people, the lack of rights protecting transgender 30 people, mostly in the United States but definitely being aware of what was happening in the rest 31 of the world as well. And so, the art really took a turn to this kind of darker area, trying to kind 32 of share that information with my audience, and I kind of went down that road for a while. And, 33 I think, it really affected me and my own energy because I was putting so much energy into that 34 work and the work was so dark and I felt it. I had to, after I graduated for my undergrad, I had 35 to take a couple of steps back from looking into that stuff, researching it, thinking about it. And, 36 when I entered grad school a few years later, I kind of started back on that track for a little bit, 37 but soon after realized that I needed to actually completely revamp my direction on how I was 38 making work because it was affecting me too much. So, I’ve now tried to come at these topics, 39 not necessarily just about transgender identity, but much more broad version of anybody who Gavin Rouille 8 The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies University of Minnesota has been, “othered” and trying to kind of question what that means 1 and why that happens, and 2 mostly through text. 3 AJ: Wow, so printed letters and words and . . .? 4 GR: Yeah, in different ways and usually words that are distorted or difficult to read, to force people 5 to change their perspective in some ways. I don’t know if you’ve ever seen . . . you probably 6 have, those holograms of Spiderman and you see him and he’s like Peter Parker and then you 7 turn the card and he’s flying through . . . 8 AJ: Yeah, like Spidey. 9 GR: So, I’ve learned a technique of doing that on paper just by folding and so you look at the piece in 10 one direction and you can read one thing and then you turn it the other way and you can read 11 another. So, one of my favorite ones is a piece that reads, “I disapprove of you,” one way and 12 then the other says, “I’m afraid of who I am.” 13 AJ: Wow. 14 GR: So, it’s kind of that inner/outer relationship . . . 15 AJ: Dialogue. 16 GR: Dialogue between what I think about you outwardly and what that actually means to me on the 17 inside. 18 AJ: Sure, wow. That sounds powerful. Is there a place online where your work can be viewed? 19 GR: Definitely. Google my name. 20 AJ: OK. 21 GR: gavinlaurencerouille@wordpress. 22 AJ: Wordpress – all right-y. Wow. So, what were some pivotal moments? I mean, if you look back 23 over your decision to really be authentic with yourself, with other people, what would you say 24 are some pivotal moments that define this sort of new outward expression of your life? Would 25 you have done anything differently? 26 GR: No, I wouldn’t have done anything differently. I don’t believe in regrets. But, pivotal moments 27 specifically? I definitely think starting testosterone was huge and coming out to . . . well, 28 specifically to my dad just because I think it was eating at me for so long. That’s a good 29 question. There’s probably lots of them but everything just kind of seemed to flow so naturally. 30 There aren’t many things that stick out as this huge event, it’s just kind of the process has been 31 fairly smooth. 32 AJ: That’s good, right? 33 GR: Yeah. Gavin Rouille 9 The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies University of Minnesota AJ: Have you been involved in any organizations or have there been any specific 1 people that sort of 2 gave you this, “ah-ha” moment? Like, “Oh, yeah. I saw Buck Angel and now I need to do this.” 3 I’m not trying to put words in your mouth, but just trying to give some examples. 4 GR: I grew up . . . as soon as I came out when I was 11 or 12 as a lesbian, I started going to this youth 5 organization in Burlington, Vermont, called Ouright Vermont. 6 AJ: I know of this organization. 7 GR: I grew up there. 8 AJ: Is that right? Within the . . . that was your . . . yeah. Were you ever on staff? 9 GR: No. I volunteered there after I kind of got more comfortable. I went there for a good couple 10 years and started going by the name of Gavin as a youth there as well. So, that was really 11 pivotal and definitely the people who worked there and kind of led groups and stuff. And all the 12 youth, the whole experience, was huge for me – to have that space where I felt safe and . . . 13 AJ: They used to have buses that would go pick up kids from rural parts of Vermont and bring them 14 to the center to hang out. 15 GR: Yeah, it was amazing. Just to not be alone, to meet people, and get crushes. The whole 16 experience. And then, I think the other most pivotal people were probably from my undergrad 17 education. My professor there, Adriane Herman, who . . . we really didn’t like each other at all at 18 first. She scared me. 19 AJ: Wow. 20 GR: She was very challenging, challenged a lot of the work I made. 21 AJ: Is she trans identified? 22 GR: No, just so smart and just very blunt. 23 AJ: Where did you go to . . .? 24 GR: Maine College of Art in Portland, Maine. But, she just challenged me to really think harder and 25 to challenge my audience more, just gave me amazing advice and people to look at – other 26 artists who kind of contemplate and all that. She’s really been my mentor and I still consider her 27 . . . she’s like family to me at this point. She’s been huge, always been a huge supporter. She 28 introduced me, not literally but, to an artist, Adrian Piper. 29 AJ: Yeah. 30 GR: Who is one of my heroes. I absolutely love her work, as somebody who was also kind of on . . . 31 in the middle between two identities, you know, this Black woman who passed as white and 32 kind of went through the world examining that. During my undergrad experience, a lot of what I 33 was doing was quite similar but between male and female and really tried to figure out . . . you 34 know, experiment with that and analyze my own gender and how people react to me if I took up 35 space on the sidewalk or if said hello or if I made eye contact, or if I didn’t do these things and Gavin Rouille 10 The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies University of Minnesota how people would interact with me differently. Whether I passed or not. 1 So, she was a huge 2 influence and continues to be somebody I re-visit often. 3 AJ: Love, relationships. How has that been impacted by your gender identity? Are you currently in 4 a relationship? And, if so, with who? 5 GR: When I was a lesbian, I had no problems getting dates with women, flirting. I was just like a 6 little social butterfly around people I was interested in. And then I . . . well, it wasn’t actually 7 until I really started to transition that I started to put words to it and came out and requested 8 that people use male pronouns . . . 9 AJ: And then the dates just started flooding in. 10 GR: And then my anxiety came out and I started to struggle with panic attacks and general anxiety. I 11 really struggled with meeting people and getting out of my house. Thankfully I already had a 12 partner when I had started, though that didn’t last long into my transition. 13 AJ: Do you think the break-up was because of the transition? 14 GR: I think it played a part, though she knew the whole time we were together that I was . . . 15 AJ: Moving in that direction? 16 GR: Yeah. 17 AJ: And, I imagine you were pretty heavily butch identified to start. 18 GR: Yeah, yeah. 19 AJ: But she didn’t site that as a reason, like, “Dealing with this transition is too difficult.” 20 GR: No, I mean there were parts like that where she specifically said I was acting like her ex-21 boyfriends or I was different. I didn’t notice that though, that wasn’t my experience of what 22 was happening. Maybe it was what was happening. But, as I’ve been able to feel more 23 comfortable in my body, muscle mass and facial hair, I’ve definitely felt more comfortable 24 getting out and meeting people. I’ve definitely been a user of online dating because I think that 25 makes it a lot easier to just initially be like, “I’m trans,” and be out and so that anybody I interact 26 with immediately knows and it’s not like I meet somebody out at a bar and have to disclose. 27 AJ: Or, wonder if they might be interested in me. 28 GR: Yeah, that just creates a lot of anxiety. 29 AJ: Right. 30 GR: I think’s what I was afraid of, in the beginning. So, that has been a good tool and I’ve met a lot 31 of great people, though none of those relationships worked. But, that’s how it goes. I am 32 currently seeing actually a transgender woman. 33 AJ: Really? 34 GR: Which is the first time I’ve ever dated a transgender woman. Gavin Rouille 11 The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies University of Minnesota AJ: 1 What’s that like? 2 GR: New, and interesting and exciting. I think we understand a lot, in very different ways. 3 AJ: But, there are some similarities to the struggle no matter which direction you’re going. 4 GR: It’s nice to know that it’s an understood thing and we can communicate about those 5 experiences and just . . . 6 AJ: Those microaggressions that happen every day. 7 GR: Yeah, and we can both be aware for each other instead of sometimes I get really anxious and be 8 like, “Did you notice that?” Other people are like, “You’re overthinking it, you’re over reacting.” 9 And then being with somebody who will be like, “Yeah, that is going on.” 10 AJ: What kinds of microaggressions do you experience in the day-to-day world? 11 GR: Thankfully I don’t experience much. 12 AJ: You’re just oblivious. 13 GR: I am. I mean, I pass in so many ways. I think it’s more things that I . . . I think it’s more things 14 that I notice connected to female-identified people. I’m working with a lot of young men and 15 the way that they talk about women and relationships with women and how they express their 16 masculinity. But, I don’t often experience those situations in relation to gender identity or at 17 least in identifying as a transgender person. I probably do actually and I just don’t always notice 18 it. I mean, I’ve noticed it when people call me pretty or beautiful, those moments when I’m just 19 like, “You don’t know that that’s not . . .” I don’t know. 20 AJ: Like that’s not a compliment for me. 21 GR: Yeah, or I guess like in online dating situations where people just say really inappropriate things 22 based on my transgender identity or asking inappropriate questions or making assumptions 23 about me that are uninvited and gross. 24 AJ: Sure. What about your interactions in institutions and medical facilities and the criminal justice 25 system, educational system? Have you had any challenges in those areas? 26 GR: I think I often feel like I become a sort of poster child for the transgender people. So, it becomes 27 kind of like this commodity where people want you to be involved in something because you 28 make it more interesting. 29 AJ: So, almost tokenization. 30 GR: Yeah, totally. But, it got me into grad school for free. 31 AJ: Wow. 32 GR: I’ll take that. 33 AJ: Yeah, exactly. Gavin Rouille 12 The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies University of Minnesota GR: But when applying to jobs, I’ve definitely noticed . . . everybody is pretty open 1 to diversity now 2 and welcomes that, and so it does become this thing that people are attracted to, but . . . I don’t 3 know. Sometimes, it can be . . . it just feels a little weird sometimes. 4 AJ: So, no negative interactions with the police or anything like that? 5 GR: No, thankfully. 6 AJ: You’re finding housing, employment. 7 GR: No problems. 8 AJ: Where do you work? 9 GR: Currently, I work at Avenues for Homeless Youth and I came out to the person who interviewed 10 me the first day. I came out to everybody who interviewed me the first day, and then I basically 11 stopped coming out. 12 AJ: OK. 13 GR: So, a few of . . . definitely a good handful of my co-workers are aware of my transgender identity 14 and then there’s a lot of grey area where I’m not sure if people know. There’s definitely a large 15 population of staff that are involved in the church in whatever way the church is . . . whatever 16 you consider that. 17 AJ: OK. 18 GR: And, I think that brings a lot of anxiety for me and that was a big part of the reason why I kind of 19 stopped talking about it. And also, realizing that the work I do at the homeless youth shelter is 20 about the youth and unless it’s a good segue of me talking about it with the youth that will 21 actually help them, uplift them, aid them in whatever they’re going through, just doesn’t seem 22 necessary to come out. We have such a high turnover, otherwise it would be like every other 23 day I’d be introducing myself, “Hi, I’m Gavin, I’m transgender.” 24 AJ: Right. 25 GR: It’s not about me and my shit. 26 AJ: Are there queer kids that come through there at all? 27 GR: Once in a while, yeah. 28 AJ: Because, I mean, sometimes it’s sort of nice to know that you’re in a space that identities like 29 yours are welcome and supported. 30 GR: Totally. 31 AJ: What do you think the relationship is between the L, the G, the B and the T? In your own 32 experience? 33 GR: The relationships? Gavin Rouille 13 The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies University of Minnesota AJ: Yeah, like there’s the lesbian, gay, bisexual and then the T has sort of 1 been added on along the 2 process. Some people feel like there is some tensions between those communities, some 3 people don’t. I’m just curious how you feel about it. 4 GR: I think it really depends on the community and the group. I didn’t feel that way when I was at 5 Outright Vermont, there was a whole mix of us in there. I didn’t feel those kind of layers, just 6 kind of we were all in it together. But, as you kind of . . . I don’t know, as I’ve grown up and go 7 to the gay bars or read newspapers and do more research about LGBT community, I definitely 8 see more of it. But, I don’t have a whole lot of personal experiences with that personally. I 9 guess I try not to look at it that way and . . . I don’t know. 10 AJ: Were you involved in the marriage equality campaign? Have you worked on any of those? 11 GR: No. I’m not a huge supporter of marriage in general. 12 AJ: OK. Marriage is an antiquated concept that is designed to subjugate women and it’s something 13 that we need to eradicate from our culture and society. 14 GR: It just needs to be different maybe. 15 AJ: I’m putting words in your mouth. 16 GR: Yeah, I mean I totally agree with . . . 17 AJ: Quote Gavin. 18 GR: Quote me on that one. I just never felt like that was where my energy needed to be. I don’t 19 think marriage is what defines love or what defines relationships, by any means. So, I always 20 thought we should be putting more money into education and helping build more tolerance and 21 acceptance within . . . starting in elementary school and leading all the way through. 22 AJ: Employment opportunities for queer and homeless youth, that would be something. 23 GR: Wouldn’t it. I think we might have to wrap it up soon though. 24 AJ: OK. I just want to know, what do you think the agenda should be for the transgender 25 community going forward? 26 GR: I don’t even know. 27 AJ: What would you like the world to look like in 50 years? 28 GR: That this didn’t even matter. What it looked like before it was ever a problem or an issue, just 29 complete acceptance. I imagine a world kind of like . . . oh, what’s that book? Women on the 30 Edge of Time. Have you read that? 31 AJ: I have not. 32 GR: It’s a utopia that is absolutely amazing. That’s how I would . . . 33 AJ: Women on the Edge of Time. 34 GR: Yeah. Gavin Rouille 14 The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies University of Minnesota AJ: I’ll have 1 to pick that up. 2 GR: Definitely. It’s really queer and just . . . it’s so smart for something that was written, I think, back 3 in the 1960s or 1970s. It was totally out of its time. 4 AJ: So, everyone loves everyone for who they are and not necessarily for what body parts they bring 5 or what gender identities they bring. 6 GR: Yeah, they all use gender-neutral pronouns and men can be mothers and women can be fathers. 7 You can have large groups of parents, but none of them are your biological parents and the way 8 they handle conflict resolution . . . the whole thing is just really an amazing way of imagining the 9 future. 10 AJ: Wow, what a great utopian vision to end on. 11 GR: Yeah. 12 AJ: Thank you so much for your time, Gavin. I really appreciate it. Again, all the best with your 13 upcoming medical interventions. 14 GR: Thank you. 15 AJ: And, good luck in this new relationship. 16 GR: Thank you. 17 AJ: Thank you. 18 GR: Thank you, Andrea.