K. Davis Senseman Narrator Andrea Jenkins Interviewer The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies University of Minnesota January 10, 2017 The Transgender Oral History Project of the Upper Midwest will empower individuals to tell their story, while providing students, historians, and the public with a more rich foundation of primary source material about the transgender community. The project is part of the Tretter Collection at the University of Minnesota. The archive provides a record of GLBT thought, knowledge and culture for current and future generations and is available to students, researchers and members of the public. The Transgender Oral History Project will collect up to 400 hours of oral histories involving 200 to 300 individuals over the next three years. Major efforts will be the recruitment of individuals of all ages and experiences, and documenting the work of The Program in Human Sexuality. This project will be led by Andrea Jenkins, poet, writer, and trans-activist. Andrea brings years of experience working in government, non-profits and LGBT organizations. If you are interested in being involved in this exciting project, please contact Andrea. Andrea Jenkins jenki120@umn.edu (612) 625-4379 K. Davis Senseman 3 The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies University of Minnesota 1 Andrea Jenkins -AJ 2 K. Davis Senseman -KDS 3 4 AJ: So, hello. 5 KDS: Hello. 6 AJ: My name is Andrea Jenkins and I am the oral historian for the Transgender Oral History Project 7 at the University of Minnesota Tretter Collection. Today is January 10, 2017. I am in downtown 8 Minneapolis, on a very snowy day, at COCO – the co-working facility that’s located in the historic 9 grain exchange building. I’m here today with K. Davis Senseman. 10 KDS: Yes. 11 AJ: How are you doing today, Davis? 12 KDS: I’m good, I’m good. 13 AJ: Yeah. So, if you can state your name, how it’s pronounced – I think I got it right. 14 KDS: Yes, you got it right. 15 AJ: Spell it so that we make sure that we have all the spelling correct. State your gender identity 16 today, as you claim it and describe it; state your gender identity as it was assigned at birth; and 17 then what pronouns you use. 18 KDS: All right. So, K. Davis Senseman is correct. K-period, D-a-v-i-s S-e-n-s-e-m-a-n, so just like it 19 sounds. My gender identity today, I would say, is gender queer, gender non-conforming. My 20 gender assigned at birth was female and what was the last question? 21 AJ: Pronouns? 22 KDS: Oh, my pronouns. So, my pronouns are pretty . . . I have different groups of people that use 23 different pronouns for me. So, I’ve got family, I’ve got friends, and I’ve got clients. I started off 24 my career in a very . . . I’m an attorney and the legal field is pretty binary. So, all of those clients 25 mostly use female pronouns, sometimes they use my name at birth. I have a large . . . 26 AJ: Because that’s how you . . .? 27 KDS: That was how I started out . . . 28 AJ: When you first hung out your shingle. 29 KDS: Exactly. 30 AJ: How long ago was that? 31 KDS: I graduated from law school in 2003. I worked at a firm from 2003-2010 and then I’ve been on 32 my own since 2010. So, it’s been a while. 33 AJ: It’s been a pretty lengthy career. K. Davis Senseman 4 The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies University of Minnesota 1 KDS: Yeah. 2 AJ: So, you were saying your clients use . . . 3 KDS: Those clients use female pronouns mostly. A lot of people know me from then so a lot of folks 4 will use female pronouns. My son, who is now 8, when he was . . . kind of began speaking until 5 maybe he was 2 or 3, he would switch back and forth – male and female pronouns. And I have 6 groups of friends, some in New York and some in LA, who I’ve spent time with who just default 7 to male pronouns. I also have some friends here who say, at different times, confided to me, 8 “You know, whenever I talk about you, I use male pronouns. Is that okay?” That’s totally fine 9 with me. 10 AJ: I do the same, I’m just going to confess right now. 11 KDS: Yeah. A lot of people do. I recently have . . . I have a lot of friends . . . I feel like the current 12 hostile political climate . . . the hostile political climate over the past few years has . . . I have a 13 lot of friends that I feel very kind of . . . these are the closest people to what I’m like and many of 14 them use gender neutral pronouns – they pronouns. I’ve realized recently that being a business 15 owner and being an attorney, I do interviews a lot, I speak on things, I publish things. I’ve 16 decided recently to just be very direct about sometimes telling a publication or telling someone, 17 “I want you to use they pronouns here,” because I feel like it’s important that people realize . . . 18 it makes totally sense and there is a huge swath of people in my life who use they pronouns for 19 me. My now 8-year-old often says, “Maybe that’s the kind of pronoun that would work for 20 you.” He’s been kind of trying to figure it out since he was born – where do you fit? He tells 21 people, I go by Baba – that’s what he refers to me as, and the thing I really like is that he goes to 22 school with a lot of Muslim kids and they really get Baba. They’re just like, “Oh, you’re a Baba, 23 but you were born a girl but now you’re a Baba.” I’m like, “Yeah,” and they’re like, “OK, great.” 24 So, Tommy tells people, “For me, Baba means kind of like a mom, kind of like a dad, but not 25 really either.” 26 AJ: That’s pretty fascinating. 27 KDS: Yeah. He really talked about that a lot – until he was about six and then for a little bit he was 28 like, “I’m tired of explaining to people what Babas are.” And then recently he’s really gotten 29 back into, “I’m going to educate everybody.” And really now, he’s been at school so long that so 30 many of the kids he knows will also say, “That’s not a mom, that’s a Baba.” “That’s not a dad, 31 that’s a Baba.” For Tommy, Babas are part moms and part dads. 32 AJ: Oh, wow. That is fascinating. 33 KDS: So, I use all pronouns. I mean really, I tell people mostly like, “Whatever comes flying out of 34 your mouth works for me.” I wake up some mornings and I feel like, “Yeah, I’m in solidarity with 35 women because that’s how people read me sometimes.” And then I wake up other mornings 36 and I’m like, “Oh, you know, I feel more . . .” It’s weird, it’s not a . . . and I think that’s what kept 37 me for a long time from thinking, “Well, I’m not . . . I don’t have enough problem with my 38 assigned gender to be able to claim any type of trans identity or . . . it felt like no, I don’t deal 39 with enough. People generally . . . if they say she, in most cases it doesn’t bug me unless they’re 40 . . . unless they’re saying she and using female pronouns out of a place of disrespect. K. Davis Senseman 5 The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies University of Minnesota AJ: And we 1 can tell, right? 2 KDS: Right. And, you know, it’s weird. In my industry, women are still . . . I sometimes will tell clients, 3 if they use female pronouns for me, I will say, “Don’t let that attorney, or that opposing counsel, 4 know that I might be a woman or that I might be anything other than a man.” Because when 5 they read my name, they’ll just assume I’m a man because we just assume everyone . . . 6 AJ: Exactly . . . named Davis is male identified. 7 KDS: Exactly. And in the legal field, there are not that many women. 8 AJ: Right. 9 KDS: And so, I often will say, “Nope, let’s just . . .” A lot of times in that industry women are just . . . 10 it’s not a great industry for women. 11 AJ: Wow, that is . . . thanks for that . . . 12 KDS: It’s a long answer. 13 AJ: It’s a long answer but it’s really important and really sort of highlights the nuance of just this 14 whole new sort of gender revolution that’s going on and the ways that, certainly you – but I 15 think maybe other people are thinking about as well. So, yeah – thank you. So, Davis, what’s 16 the first thing you remember in life? What is your first memory? 17 KDS: That’s a good question. It’s really interesting because I . . . so I had . . . my name, my birth name 18 – my grandmother’s name is Katherine and my birth name is very similar to her name. She had 19 asked my parents, I’m the youngest cousin – I’m an only child because it was very hard for my 20 parents to have me, and she told my parents, “Do not name that child after me,” because she 21 did not like her name. My grandma was pretty . . . she was pretty butch. Catherine was not 22 really her name. She said, “Don’t name that baby after me,” so they named me a derivative of 23 Katherine and she said, “I don’t like that name, I don’t like any of the names it shortens to, I’m 24 not going to call this child that.” So, she never used my name. 25 AJ: Is that right? 26 KDS: She called me, “the baby,” until I was about 17. By that time, my friends had started using my 27 last name, Davis was my father’s last name, started using that for me and she said, “That will 28 work for me.” So, she never called me by my first name – ever. 29 AJ: So, your grandma named you? 30 KDS: Yeah, she named me basically. My name was, “the baby” for 16 years – 17 years. And then she 31 said, “Well, Davis works – I’ll use that.” 32 AJ: Wow. 33 KDS: She was just like, “This is how it is, I don’t like that name, I don’t think you like that name, I don’t 34 think that name goes with you, we’re not going to use it.” So, I remember as a kid we used to 35 have a mirror at the top of our basement stairs. I grew up in Pittsburg and basements weren’t 36 finished and the back of our basement was like a coal cellar where they used to put the coal in. K. Davis Senseman 6 The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies University of Minnesota So, I was standing at the top of our basement stairs, we had a mirror, and that’s 1 where you hung 2 your coats and I remember looking in that mirror, and I went to Catholic school as a kid so we 3 had uniforms. They dressed me in dresses for . . . 4 AJ: Well, you were at Catholic school, you need to wear a plaid skirt and white shirt. 5 KDS: Plaid skirt, yes, and a white shirt and knee socks. 6 AJ: We know the uniform, yeah. 7 KDS: And so, they dressed me in dresses in nursery school, maybe that’s what I remember. By the 8 time I was in kindergarten I was like, “I don’t need any of these except for school uniforms.” 9 But, I remember looking in that mirror and thinking, “I don’t even believe there’s a me.” And in 10 some ways . . . I remember I used to say that phrase a lot and think, “I don’t think this person 11 that I see is really who I am.” I remember thinking that. I used to think that and think, “What if 12 this is all just . . . what if someone is imagining this world that we live in and what if this is just 13 like . . . like how do you know that you’re real?” 14 AJ: Like a menagerie almost. 15 KDS: Yeah. And, I used to think that all the time – like I don’t believe . . . and it probably wasn’t until I 16 was away at college and cut my hair really short and really kind of came into my being, that I 17 was like . . . that I could look into a mirror and really be like, “Oh, this is who I am.” 18 AJ: There I am. Wow. So, your first memory wasn’t necessarily around gender . . . 19 KDS: No. 20 AJ: But, it was about, “I am not this person somehow.” 21 KDS: Right. I am not this person, I am not this name, I’m not what they want me to be. I was the 22 youngest, I was a girl, I was supposed to be . . . My other grandmother was like . . . all she 23 wanted me to do was take dancing lessons and all these . . . because she had had only grandsons 24 before that. 25 AJ: OK, yeah – so she was ready for the frilly dresses and fur little jackets. 26 KDS: And I just said, “I would rather die than go do that.” My father was very good about . . . because 27 it was his mother, and he said, “Well, then, we won’t do that. You can play baseball, you can do 28 what you want.” 29 AJ: So, you grew up in Pittsburgh? 30 KDS: Yes. 31 AJ: I assume you went to school there. 32 KDS: Yeah. 33 AJ: What was family life like? I mean, you’ve described some of the sort of workings, but was it an 34 intact family? K. Davis Senseman 7 The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies University of Minnesota KDS: Yes, my parents were together 1 until my father died. 2 AJ: Oh, wow – sorry. 3 KDS: My mother is . . . and Pittsburgh is . . . it’s a very blue-collar kind of working class – the entire city 4 was growing up. So, my father was a . . . he had a job in a factory that his union went on strike 5 one year, probably . . . I guess, a little before 1980, so I was like 3 or 4, and they never went back 6 to work. They hired scabs and that was the end of it. 7 AJ: Wow. 8 KDS: So, then I had a friend from pre-school whose father worked for the City of Pittsburgh, he was 9 an attorney, and he said, “You should work for the city.” And that’s kind of how things work in 10 Pittsburgh – you know somebody and then you . . . 11 AJ: Well that’s kind of how things work everywhere but . . . 12 KDS: True. And he ended up getting a job as a laborer for the City and so he worked for them for the 13 rest of my life. 14 AJ: Wow . . . for the rest of his life. 15 KDS: Well, the rest of his life – yes. And, my mom stayed home . . . she had worked and then she 16 stayed home until I was about 8 and then she went back to work. My grandmother, we had a 17 side-by-side duplex and my grandmother lived on the other side. My mom was . . . her father 18 had died when she was 12, pretty traumatically. She had a twin sister and they have pretty 19 persistent mental illness – kind of undiagnosed, untreated mental illness, because in the 1980s 20 in Pittsburgh . . . people just were how they were. 21 AJ: Yeah, didn’t go to therapy and all of that kind of stuff. 22 KDS: Yup. So, she was pretty emotionally abusive and my father worked all the time, because when 23 you work for the City, it snows and there’s overtime and you work the overtime because you 24 make more money. 25 AJ: Right, exactly. 26 KDS: And so, I was lucky that my grandmother lived there because I spent a lot of time at her house. I 27 was very close with my father. 28 AJ: Was it your mom’s mom or your dad’s mom? 29 KDS: It was my mom’s mom. And so, she would often tell me . . . she would be very upset. She 30 would be like, “I’m sorry she’s like this.” And it was like well you . . . yeah, you made her but it’s 31 not your fault. And so, I feel like probably my parents maybe may have been happier if they had 32 split up but my father really . . . when he died, he told me it was my job to take care of her. 33 They got married young. 34 AJ: He was committed to making sure she was going to be OK. K. Davis Senseman 8 The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies University of Minnesota KDS: Yeah, that she was going to be OK. And he knew her by herself 1 would not be OK, my 2 grandmother wouldn’t be OK. And so, when he died . . . he died when I was just out of law 3 school. He kind of stayed alive long enough to see me graduate. 4 AJ: Wow, what a moment. 5 KDS: And he had been really sick when I was like 5. He got ulcerative colitis and he had almost all of 6 his digestive system removed and had a colostomy. He was young, so he was in the hospital for 7 the better part of a year when I was about five. 8 AJ: And he still worked as a laborer all this life? 9 KDS: He still worked – yeah, yeah. And built things at home and fixed everything – and taught me 10 how to do a lot of that. 11 AJ: Is that right? 12 KDS: I feel like from a young age, he sort of realized, “You’re going to need to know this – there’s 13 probably not going to be a traditional man in your life and you’re going to need . . .” So, he 14 taught me everything he did and a lot of the folks that I know and that I’ve dated since then 15 have said, “Oh, my dad never taught me anything.” 16 AJ: Right. 17 KDS: And I was like . . . 18 AJ: That’s interesting, I interviewed someone yesterday who was just saying the same . . . but their 19 dad, even though they were close, but their dad never really gave them those skills – like those 20 sort of hands-on building, but their dad knew these things and that’s what their dad did. They 21 would sort of be around and watching but didn’t make that sort of official transfer and your dad 22 did. 23 KDS: Yeah, he did. He just was like, “You’re going to . . .” And I think part of it also was he got so sick 24 when I was young that I think he always worried about . . . it might happen to me again and you 25 need to be able to get along, this other parent of yours is not going to do it. So, yeah – so he 26 taught me kind of how to do a lot of stuff and he was very, very, very politically active, I think 27 because he had gone on strike, he’d always been a part of a union. 28 AJ: That’s a political activity, absolutely. 29 KDS: Yes. And so, we would . . . from my youngest memories, it was going to spaghetti dinners for 30 this county commissioner or . . . 31 AJ: Fund raisers. 32 KDS: Yes. And also, not . . . he was a big believer in boycotts and so we wouldn’t eat . . . I thought for 33 a long time I didn’t like grapes, but he was like, “No, we just don’t eat grapes because of the 34 conditions with migrant workers and because of . . .” And he was like, “No, we just won’t have 35 them in our house. And Nabisco had been in Pittsburgh, they had a plant – and they shut down K. Davis Senseman 9 The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies University of Minnesota a plant, I remember, when I was like in middle school and he was like, 1 “We won’t have any 2 Nabisco products.” 3 AJ: So, no Cream of Wheat? 4 KDS: No. no Oreos – no nothing. We had to buy the other . . . he was like, “Nope.” 5 AJ: You had to buy Hydrox, huh? 6 KDS: Exactly. He was like, “You will learn to love these.” But he was really adamant and really, really 7 good about boycotts work and you’ve got to stick together and he used to always say, you 8 know, “I had a net.” He always talked about, “I had a net when I didn’t have a job and there was 9 something there to catch me. You could be so lucky as to never need the net, but you’ve got to 10 make sure it’s still there for other people.” 11 AJ: Wow, go dad. 12 KDS: Yeah, and sometimes I’m like, “I’m so glad he’s not here because he would just be . . .” He 13 would just be sick. 14 AJ: Yeah, with the state of . . . 15 KDS: Yeah. 16 AJ: Speaking of this, and I really want to keep this personal but it’s just you’re bringing up all of 17 these really brilliant sort of political things. I’m just looking at your shirt that you’re wearing 18 today which is really political, “Listen to Black women.” That’s a pretty powerful statement for a 19 gender fluid, gender queer – is that how you said you describe your identity? 20 KDS: Yes. 21 AJ: White identified . . . 22 KDS: Yes. 23 AJ: . . . sort of masculine identified in the perception of most people . . . 24 KDS: Yes. 25 AJ: . . . shirt for you to wear. What does that mean to you? Talk about it. 26 KDS: Well, I talked about how my mom – her father passed away when she was 12, so my 27 grandmother raised her, her and her twin sister, by herself. Their next-door neighbor was 28 named, Aunt Annie, and kind of . . . she was a Black woman who lived in the west end of 29 Pittsburgh. And Pittsburgh was not . . . Pittsburgh still isn’t a very well-integrated city. 30 AJ: Right, it’s very segregated – yes. 31 KDS: And they lived next door to each other and Aunt Annie was a single woman, and they kind of 32 worked together to raise those kids. 33 AJ: There’s a play and a movie right now that’s set in Pittsburgh called Fences that sort of . . . K. Davis Senseman 10 The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies University of Minnesota KDS: 1 Yes, August Wilson. 2 AJ: . . . lays out that whole sort of . . . yeah. 3 KDS: Yeah. It was my grandmother and Aunt Annie and they kind of raised these girls together. And 4 so, a lot of the kind of wisdom and kind of the knowledge about life and living that my 5 grandmother passed down to me was all from a Black woman. 6 AJ: Influenced by Aunt Annie. 7 KDS: Who taught her, “This is how you’re going to do it, this is how you’re going to raise these girls 8 and this is how you’re going to . . .” 9 AJ: Wow. 10 KDS: And so, our family traditions are things that we . . . I’m always . . . you know, our superstitions. 11 I’m always like, “Oh, the only people I know who have these are Black people.” And so, to me, I 12 just feel like in the latest . . . I mean, if you look at the latest presidential election, Black woman 13 are the only people who tried to save this country and say, “This is what needs to happen.” 14 AJ: I’m so glad you said that, Davis. My heart just sort of wiggled and chills went up my spine 15 because . . . I mean, the numbers show that . . . 16 KDS: Numbers don’t lie. 17 AJ: . . . Black women came out to support Hillary Clinton. 18 KDS: Hillary Clinton, who hasn’t always been so great about race issues. 19 AJ: Yeah, absolutely. But still, they stood up and actually, I believe that there was a lot of voter 20 suppression that really . . . 21 KDS: Oh, yes. 22 AJ: . . . eliminated some of that support to make this presidency happen. And now I’m on tape 23 saying that forever and the only reason why - because, believe me, I recognize where I am, but I 24 believe that to be true. 25 KDS: It’s 100% true. And you know, it just . . . I feel like the Black mothers of the movement have kind 26 of . . . these are women who lost their children. I often say to my white friends, white moms, 27 “What would you be doing if you knew that when you send your baby boy out the door, any 28 encounter he may have may just be the end – that just might be the end.” That is a real reality 29 and I just feel like to me, and also . . . I talk about this with my partner a lot and it’s something 30 that she has now noticed and will always say, “Wow, you were right about that.” I often say 31 Black women see me more than anyone in the world. I can be in a room sometimes with 32 straight white man, or even gay white men, and I will literally be invisible because they’re like, 33 “Ahh, I don’t know what to do with you.” But when I interact with a Black woman in like a 34 transactional setting where I’m working with her or she’s . . . Black women see me because I feel 35 like they’re like, “Oh, I see you, I know what you go through.” It’s like a . . . I often say I feel K. Davis Senseman 11 The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies University of Minnesota more community, often times, when I am in a room of Black women or trans 1 women, then I do 2 when I’m with a bunch of gay and lesbian-identified people because it’s like . . . 3 AJ: Well, that is one of my questions. I usually save it toward the end of my conversation, but you 4 brought it up organically. I do want to get back to family life but what do you think the 5 connection is between the L, the G, the B, and then separately the T? Should this be one 6 conjoined movement or do trans and gender non-conforming people need to sort of strike out 7 on their own? What do you think about that? 8 KDS: Yeah, I mean I think it’s the . . . I mean, it’s another case of Black women tried to save this 9 country and trans people fought and did get rights for lesbian and gay people. There were trans 10 folks . . . 11 AJ: Trans women of color, let’s be real specific about this. Trans people, but trans women of color – 12 I mean, Miss Major, Sylvia Rivera . . . 13 KDS: Yes, they started this movement. 14 AJ: Marsha P. Johnson, all of these women – yeah. 15 KDS: It’s so interesting because the history got whitewashed and you know, then this most recent 16 marriage movement, it was like trans people of color didn’t have a lot to gain from that. Getting 17 married isn’t like . . . that was kind of the last hurdle for gay and lesbian people. “Now, I’m just 18 the same. Now, I can settle in here and . . . “ I feel like . . . I mean, like when you look at the 19 Employment Non-Discrimination Act when gay and lesbian people were willing to say like, 20 “Yeah, we’ll leave off trans protections and yeah, we’ll . . .” I think it’s a matter of realizing that 21 saying about, “They came for the trade unionists and I wasn’t a trade unionist.” I want the L’s 22 and the G’s of the movement to realize that’s how it goes – when they’re coming, they’re 23 coming for the most marginalized first. 24 AJ: They came for the Jews; they came for the Blacks. 25 KDS: And you don’t fit in there but then there’s going to be no one for you. I feel like it’s . . . you 26 know what? I think it makes sense that trans people might say, “We’ve got to do our own thing 27 because you all aren’t coming along.” What I want to see and what I hope to see, right now I 28 serve on the board of PFund because I feel like they’re making it . . . we’re saying out loud, “We 29 have elevated priorities and they are people of color and indigenous people; they are folks in 30 North and South Dakota because, as part of our region, they are the most at risk; and they are 31 trans and gender non-conforming people.” If you’re a white middle class gay or lesbian person, 32 we’re not saying you don’t go through anything but we’re saying we’ve got a way longer place of 33 lifting up. 34 AJ: And when we lift up the most marginalized, everybody benefits. 35 KDS: Everybody wins. 36 AJ: Everybody wins. Tell me what PFund is. You told me it’s mission and priorities, but what is 37 PFund? K. Davis Senseman 12 The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies University of Minnesota KDS: So, PFund is the midwest’s only LGBTQ community foundation. So, PFund exists 1 to help people 2 kind of continue a legacy to take care of their community and then to create and invest in 3 leaders across. So, PFund used to do scholarships and grants and now we’ve moved a lot of that 4 together and we’re doing . . . the scholarships are now more individual grants because people 5 may not be in a traditional path of education, but they need to be invested in and they’re still 6 leaders and they’re still doing work, so we kind of opened it up. And, it’s so great because 7 people are getting funds to help their organizations, they’re getting funds to go to a leadership 8 training, they’re getting funds to help with a business idea that they have to start. These folks 9 are gender non-conforming trans folks, people of color, Native people – for the most part, the 10 vast majority. Because we, two years ago, said these are our elevated priorities, because we 11 can’t . . . we don’t have enough money to fix everything. 12 AJ: Yeah, but you can start the conversations and start dialogues. 13 KDS: And it’s been nice . . . we’ve had some white gay and lesbian people who have said, “Well, I 14 don’t know about this direction,” but we’ve had way more who have said, “I love this and I think 15 this work is important.” And we always just say, “You know, well we’re just cleaning the list.” 16 AJ: Right. 17 KDS: We’re bringing along the people who are ready and I think that people . . . it used to be GLBT 18 and then folks said, “We should center women and we should say LGBT.” Well, let’s get to a 19 place where we say, “TL . . .” where we are centering around out movement for trans folks and 20 trans people of color. Trans women of color are at so much greater risk, like thousands and 21 thousands of times greater for violence and for . . . 22 AJ: Yeah, wow. I’m getting emotional listening to you here, Davis. 23 KDS: It’s just . . . I feel like it’s our job as . . . it’s mostly, I told my friends who identify, or who pass, as 24 just white lesbians and gays, I said, “It’s your job to tell people, ‘Hey, this is what’s important 25 and here’s what’s up.’” And like you said, if we lift up the most marginalized, everything is going 26 to be better. 27 AJ: Wow, well thanks for that explanation – that’s a great t-shirt. I need one of those in my life. 28 KDS: Yeah. 29 AJ: So, you grew up in Pittsburgh, intact family, dad was a huge sort of political activist and really 30 put you on a path of social justice. 31 KDS: Yes. 32 AJ: When did you first realize, and you told me – maybe this answer is the same as what you saw in 33 the mirror, but when did you first sort of realize that you were not the gender you were 34 assigned at birth? 35 KDS: Probably when I was young because I just felt like I am nothing like these girls that I know, but 36 I’m also not really like these boys that I know. I felt . . . I had some friends who were male K. Davis Senseman 13 The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies University of Minnesota friends who were not typical boys. I felt kind of a kinship with them, like this 1 is pretty close to 2 what I am. 3 AJ: Sure. 4 KDS: But then I just kind of adopted like . . . when I was young, in the 1980s, it was OK to be a tomboy 5 and it was . . . we didn’t have super gendered clothes except for dresses and so it was OK that all 6 my clothes looked like boy’s clothes because also we had a neighbor that was a little older than 7 me so I just got all his clothes. So, it was . . . so the hand-me-down train worked pretty well. 8 But, you know, I think I was always . . . I grew my hair long when I was in Catholic school because 9 that’s what I was supposed to do and my grandmother liked to put it in a super tight braid. I 10 mean, I still did boy things – I still played sports, I still didn’t get into boys and make-up and 11 things like that, but I feel like I did a lot just because I was in Catholic school, we wore a skirt 12 every day . . . 13 AJ: You were just on the train – you were just riding the girl train. 14 KDS: Yeah, “This is the way you go.” 15 AJ: Yeah. 16 KDS: I feel like when I was kind of in my junior and senior year of high school, all of my friends were 17 kind of the very pretty popular girls, but I was always just kind of their go-between because 18 they’d always be fighting about something or some boy. I always felt like the go-between of, 19 “Oh, no, let me explain to the two of you, this idiot boy that you’re worried about is not going to 20 be important.” And so, then when I got into college, I feel like that’s kind of when I realized, 21 “Oh, I am definitely different and it goes beyond I don’t think I’m attracted to boys or these boys 22 that I dated.” 23 AJ: Right, it was more than that. 24 KDS: It was more than that. But, I really don’t think until . . . my college was in the middle of 25 Pennsylvania – pretty, small. 26 AJ: What school did you go to? 27 KDS: I went to Bucknell, which is kind of . . . Lewisburg, which people are like, “Oh, I can see the lights 28 of Bucknell from . . .” And I’m like, “No, that’s a penitentiary.” I went to college and I started 29 taking sociology and English classes, English had always been kind of one of my things. 30 Sociology, you had to go one of two ways – it was either kind of criminal justice or human . . . 31 kind of if you were going to be more like a social worker or something. I started taking criminal 32 justice classes and learning about . . . I had a professor who had done all this writing about how 33 there’s no such thing as crack babies – there are babies that are undernourished but those 34 babies, that is a result of economic conditions and . . . 35 AJ: Systemic . . . 36 KDS: Yeah, systemic racism and social conditions, not a result of, “Oh, we can just write it off as . . .” I 37 remember thinking, “Oh, gosh, this is . . . there is a lot out there.” And then I started . . . I K. Davis Senseman 14 The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies University of Minnesota worked full-time when I was in school so I was an athletic trainer because you 1 got to just travel 2 with the different sports teams – I wasn’t playing sports anymore but you got to travel . . . 3 AJ: You were really into sports for a while. 4 KDS: Well, in Pittsburgh football kind of reigns the world. 5 AJ: Exactly – the Steelers. 6 KDS: Yes, exactly. So, we learned to tape ankles and stuff and it was good – it paid well, you got to 7 work a lot of hours because you had to go to practice and always be there. 8 AJ: Right. 9 KDS: So, I started working with the softball team and the volleyball team, which was so cliché and I 10 met my first . . . I’d known gay people and lesbians but I met my first gender queer . . . like really, 11 you do not know whether Stacey is . . . she gets wrong bathroomed all the time. 12 AJ: So, like Pat from Saturday Night Live. 13 KDS: Yes, Stacey was just like . . . and she’s a poet and now she’s a professor over in Nebraska. I met 14 her and was like . . . this is a person that is just like me. 15 AJ: Wow. 16 KDS: And so, Stacey kind of took me under her wing and was like, “Listen.” Just was like, “I’m going 17 to always sit down and talk to you, I’m going to always . . .” And kind of for the rest of college, I 18 was just like, “This is . . .” And I didn’t kind of say, “I think I’m queer or . . .” At all, until the very 19 end of college, but I just was like, “Oh, this person is going to be . . . she’s a year younger than 20 me but like this person was going to be my mentor.” 21 AJ: Wow. 22 KDS: Because Stacey has known what she is since a very young age. 23 AJ: And clearly you guys are still in communication. 24 KDS: Yes. 25 AJ: In relationship, I should say. 26 KDS: So she . . . it was just like . . . and then coming into my own and really kind of learning . . . she 27 grew up out on Long Island and was like, “I’ve been out as queer since the age of 15,” and was 28 just like, “Listen, this is how it is and this is how . . .” It was really just . . . it just felt so good to 29 kind of have another . . . 30 AJ: Yeah, being that . . . I am not alone kind of thing. 31 KDS: Exactly. And I feel like that was when I realized that, “Oh no, this is how I am. I’ve been getting 32 there, but this is who I am.” 33 AJ: What have been some of the challenges that you have faced since you made that determination 34 and began to express yourself more outwardly as gender non-conforming? K. Davis Senseman 15 The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies University of Minnesota KDS: So, when I got my job out of law school I was lucky because I landed at a firm 1 that was pretty 2 progressive – the attorneys were pretty liberal. But it was . . . as I kind of embraced this is who I 3 am and this is how I will dress and this is who I will be, I think they were . . . they were fine with 4 it, they really liked having a queer person because they were a smaller firm – they had 30-some 5 attorneys. So, I came up to the year where . . . and I worked hard for them and brought them in 6 a lot of business and was pretty efficient, and it came to the year where I was supposed to . . . it 7 was seven years and you would make partner at their firm. So, I was having my review and they 8 were like, “You know, you made us a lot of money, you get along with everyone, your work 9 quality is great.” And their managing partner said to me, “But there’s just something about you 10 that some of the partners . . .” I was like, “Yeah, there is something about me that’s not like any 11 of you. I’m a queer person and I’m also not an easily palatable . . . like could pass as a straight 12 lady lesbian. I’m me.” 13 AJ: Yeah. 14 KDS: I just went home and was like, “Phhh.” I said to him, I said, “Yeah, everything about me is not 15 like you and if that’s good enough to make you money but not to share your money, then that’s 16 . . .” I went home and I said to my partner at that time – my son’s mom, I just said, “You know, I 17 can’t work for these people.” I tell my clients all the time, “Don’t go into business with or get 18 into relationship with or get into anything with someone who doesn’t value you or doesn’t value 19 what you are.” I said, “That’s what I’m going to be doing.” And so, that’s when I decided . . . 20 AJ: So, they didn’t fire you but they did not want to make you partner. 21 KDS: Yeah, they were . . . 22 AJ: Which you had earned. 23 KDS: Right. And they kind of were like . . . and then the next day, of course being lawyers were like, 24 “Oh, gee, this did not work out well.” 25 AJ: Right, exactly. 26 KDS: They said, “I think you misunderstood, we were just saying . . . no, you’re going to be a partner, 27 we just were . . .” And I was like, “No, it doesn’t matter. I’m gone now.” 28 AJ: I’m out, right. 29 KDS: And it was good, and it’s been . . . it’s been so nice because now it’s like I am who I am, I look 30 how I look, no one is coming into our firm being surprised that I’m here. One of my law 31 partners, who is a straight white woman, said, “I watch . . .,” because we’ve talked about how 32 we need to expand, as we expand, really be intentional about having attorneys who look like 33 our clients and making sure that we find people who are underrepresented. And she said, “And, 34 you know, we do have to because I watch when our queer or trans clients come in and they see 35 you and their shoulders drop because they realize . . .” 36 AJ: “I can let my guard down a little bit.” K. Davis Senseman 16 The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies University of Minnesota KDS: Yeah, exactly. And she said, “I want that, I want every single client th 1 at comes to us to be able 2 to see themselves in one of our attorneys.” 3 AJ: Wow. 4 KDS: It’s like, “Yeah, that’s good because I do too.” 5 AJ: Wow. What have been some of the joys since you have decided to express your truer gender 6 identity? 7 KDS: It’s been . . . I think having a son helped me get there because kids are so . . . and he, his whole 8 life, kind of bounced back and forth between male and female pronouns. We have tapes of him 9 singing about me and using both he and she pronouns about his Baba. He’d just flow back and 10 forth. And, getting to know kids, I feel like having a kid in your life you’re around a lot of other 11 kids, kids are part of the greatest joy of being gender queer and gender non-conforming, 12 because kids like things that are different and kids, for the most part – if they’re around, if 13 they’re not only around people who look just like them, and they’ll just ask, “Hey, are you a boy 14 or a girl?” 15 AJ: Right, exactly. 16 KDS: “So you’re kind of a girl but you look like a boy.” And you can be like, “Yeah,” and they’ll be like, 17 “Oh, OK.” They’re just so honest and they’re just so . . . I feel like every time a kid asks me, 18 because if they’re with a parent, the parent is like . . . 19 AJ: Exactly. 20 KDS: . . . has a panic attack and it’s like I love when kids are like, “What are you?” I’m like, “Well, I’m 21 kind of in the middle.” They’re like, “Cool.” And then they just go about their day and then 22 they’re like, “Hey, I met someone who is in the middle,” and I think gosh, what if when I was 6 or 23 7 I met someone who was like, “I’m kind of in the middle.” It would be like, “Whoa.” 24 AJ: So, I need to ask this question but to the extent that you feel comfortable sharing, what medical 25 interventions have you pursued or intend to pursue, potentially, as a part of your gender 26 identity? 27 KDS: Yes – none, really, to date. I mean, I bind daily because the last time I ever bought an actual bra, 28 my partner said, “Oh, these are very feminine.” I said, “Well, I was shopping in the men’s 29 department, I just couldn’t find the masculine bras.” And she was like, “Oh, that’s a good 30 point.” I said, “I want to get rid of all these and I just want binders.” The clothes I wear fit 31 better and I feel better. 32 AJ: Yeah. 33 KDS: So, I bind daily. I think sometimes about should I have top surgery. I would probably be happy, 34 but, you know, I’m 41 and I’m like I could also just continue being who I am and shocking people 35 if they ever see me out of a binder. 36 AJ: Only a few select people get to see that, right? K. Davis Senseman 17 The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies University of Minnesota 1 KDS: Exactly. 2 AJ: Yeah, I used to always say, and I still do – yeah, nobody really is going to know what’s going on 3 in your pants unless you want them to. 4 KDS: Exactly. 5 AJ: And so, it’s really a social transition that is probably the most important. 6 KDS: Exactly. And people, I know people wonder. I had a close friend say to me at one point, “How 7 do you make sure everything is so flat right there?” I was like, “Oh, I’ll show you – here, this is 8 what these look like.” I said, “I’m really lucky because there are people, entrepreneurs out 9 there every day that are making better and better binders,” and they were like, “Oh, this is 10 pretty cool.” 11 AJ: So, it doesn’t . . . it’s not painful? 12 KDS: No. 13 AJ: I hear a lot of people who say they can’t breathe and . . . 14 KDS: For me, I don’t have a very big chest, and so, you know, for me it’s pretty easy. I think for a lot 15 of people who have bigger chests, it’s harder and they just have to have top surgery because 16 there’s no way they’re going to . . . for me, I’m lucky. But no, I’ve found really great . . . it’s not 17 like you can walk into a store and buy them, but there are great folks selling things online and 18 more people every day kind of making new . . . it’s nice because I, in my job, work with business 19 owners and so a lot of them will get in touch and say, “Hey, I’m doing this,” and I’m like, 20 “Fantastic.” 21 AJ: So, I know you’re married. 22 KDS: Yup, yup. 23 AJ: But, what’s your sexual identity? 24 KDS: I just normally say queer because, you know, I’m mostly . . . I’m married. 25 AJ: And you’re married to a cis-identified . . .? 26 KDS: Cis-identified woman. She identifies as queer because she doesn’t . . . she’s attracted to far 27 more masculine people and those are sometimes . . . I don’t know if she’d date a cis man every 28 again, but trans men, gender queers, that’s kind of her . . . but, yeah – I have . . . I mostly date, I 29 feel, like cis women but I think that’s also just a product of who I know and who I’m around. I 30 mostly probably date femme women, but I’ve also dated lots of folks who are kind of more 31 androgynous. Sometimes when people see pictures of . . ., “Oh, and this is who I have a son 32 with,” and they’re like, “Whoa.” I always say I have types but there’s a couple of them. But, 33 yeah, I identify as queer just kind of in everything. 34 AJ: Yeah. 35 KDS: It makes me bristle when someone says, “Oh, are you a lesbian?” I’m like, “No.” K. Davis Senseman 18 The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies University of Minnesota AJ: No, OK. So, how do 1 you define queer? 2 KDS: For me, it’s partially who I’m sexually attracted to – you know, that they’re way more than just 3 the spectrum of just men and women, there are all sorts of folks in the middle. It’s also, I feel 4 culturally queer – like I feel more community with other folks who I feel identify themselves as 5 queer. And, you know, it’s also just kind of who . . . I know there are lots of elders or people 6 who are older than me, just a little bit, who they don’t like the term queer – and I get that. My 7 father-in-law, who is like the world’s biggest progressive is like, “Don’t say that word in my 8 house.” 9 AJ: Oh, wow. 10 KDS: Because, to him, people used it as a slur and we’ve told him . . . 11 AJ: Is he gay-identified? 12 KDS: No, no. He’s straight – he’s a straight white man. He’s just like, “No, you don’t . . .” And we’ve . 13 . . 14 AJ: It’s like saying the “n” word. 15 KDS: Yes, exactly. And we’ve really had to tell him that a lot of our friends, kind of all of us, identify 16 that way. He’s coming around but I know he’s still just . . . it doesn’t feel . . . and I also like queer 17 because I feel like sometimes straight people or completely cis people who don’t get it are afraid 18 to say it, so I sometimes like to be like, “I’m queer,” because then they’re like . . . 19 AJ: But there is a generational divide and I think, again I was talking about some of these same 20 issues yesterday, and how the word queer tends to . . . not solely, but tends to have a much 21 more political identity wrapped up in it, which you have clearly stated that that is sort of a part 22 of your queerness is this analysis around race and gender identity, which sometimes just, you 23 know, lesbian or gay or straight-identified people don’t have those kinds of analysis. So, queer 24 sort of . . . 25 KDS: Yeah, it’s kind of like an umbrella but there is a lot of different avenues under it. 26 AJ: Or, an entry point to . . . 27 KDS: Yes – yes, to all these different . . . 28 AJ: Not only an umbrella but also I feel like it’s sort of an opening or something. 29 KDS: Yes. No, I think that’s very true. 30 AJ: Yeah. Are you out to your mom and grandmother? Aunt Annie? 31 KDS: Aunt Annie, you know I never even got to meet Aunt Annie. 32 AJ: Oh, you never meet Aunt Annie? 33 KDS: No, she passed away before I was . . . well, I probably met her when I was younger, but that I 34 recall . . . maybe once, maybe one time. But, she passed away when I was 6 or 7. My 35 grandmother passed away when I was in college and then after my father died – so he died right K. Davis Senseman 19 The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies University of Minnesota after I graduated from law school, he said to me, “I want you to try to . . .” 1 When he was kind of 2 telling me, “This is the reason I stayed with her and I know it’s been hard to have her.” 3 AJ: Sure. 4 KDS: He said, “I want you to try to have a relationship with her, but I know I’m not here – there’s 5 nobody here to run interference.” 6 AJ: To mediate that, yeah. 7 KDS: And he said, “You take care of yourself.” And so, I feel like when he died he kind of gave me a 8 blessing to . . . you give it your best shot but then . . . and so, I tried for like a year and she kind 9 of vacillates back and forth between . . . she writes letters and all these different things. Then 10 my partner, at the time, who I . . . I didn’t think I’d ever have children because I thought I will 11 never put a child in that situation that I was in and then my partner at the time just said to me 12 once after I had dealt with my mother calling and ranting, she said, “You don’t have to . . . you 13 don’t owe her anything anymore.” 14 AJ: Right. 15 KDS: It was just like suddenly somebody else saying, “You don’t owe this person anything anymore.” 16 I just said, “Listen, I need you to go get help, I need you to get a diagnosis, I need you to be on 17 medication if there is medication that will help, and I don’t want to hear from you until there is a 18 doctor or someone treating you that gets in touch with me.” And, I mean, she reaches out to 19 me sometimes, she sends letters and things, but she hasn’t . . . 20 AJ: She hasn’t met those conditions? 21 KDS: Right. So, I don’t have any contact with her. She knows I’m queer, she knows I’m pretty gender 22 queer. You can find me on the internet. But, yeah – so I don’t have any contact with her and it’s 23 . . . it’s the healthiest thing for me. 24 AJ: Sure. 25 KDS: It’s the healthiest thing for my kids, it’s the healthiest thing for my partner. But, yeah – it’s hard 26 to explain to people. It would be easier to be able to say like, “No, all my family is dead.” 27 AJ: Yeah. 28 KDS: But for me, it’s like, “Hmmm, most of them are dead, and the ones . . .” 29 AJ: So, you have a . . . you clearly have a family in the sense of how we define family in our culture 30 and society, but what about chosen family? Is that a big part of your reality? 31 KDS: Yeah, it sure is. Yeah, our family structure is interesting because I had my son with my previous 32 partner and we’re still a huge part of each other’s lives – and, very close. 33 AJ: Your former partner is a very well known small business owner in the community. 34 KDS: Yes, Jennifer Pritchett who owns Smitten Kitten. 35 AJ: Yeah. K. Davis Senseman 20 The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies University of Minnesota KDS: And so yeah, we are still very important to each other, which I think is odd to 1 a lot of people. 2 My wife, Sarah, has . . . 3 AJ: It’s pretty common in the LGBT world anyway. 4 KDS: Yeah, it is. My wife has a previous partner who she shares our 13-year-old with. We’ve got a 5 pretty huge chosen family and it’s . . . some of them are here, some of mine are in New York, 6 some of Sarah’s are in Chicago. But yeah, it’s big. And it’s . . . I think it’s interesting because our 7 kids, they just have so many people around them. Like someone, when Tommy was like two or 8 three, they said, “Hey, do you have a dad?” And he said, “Oh, no – I don’t have a dad, but I have 9 so many grown-ups, you have no idea.” 10 AJ: Oh, wow. 11 KDS: He used to . . . when people would be like, “Who is in your family?” or draw . . . he would put 12 people, like whoever we happened to be seeing a lot at that time, or friend’s dogs that we 13 watch. Yeah, he would just put them in there. 14 AJ: Wow, I love it. 15 KDS: He often . . . I serve on boards, Sarah does too – Sarah has work people, Jennifer has a huge 16 community around her store. We just . . . he just . . . our kids are lucky because they just have 17 so many people and they’ve got so many people they can go to for different things. 18 AJ: Right. 19 KDS: It’s nice and it’s freeing to be a queer person and be like, “I can define my family however I 20 want.” 21 AJ: Davis, this interview has been so fascinating to me because you have organically answered most 22 of the questions I typically ask. This is so amazing. 23 KDS: Good. 24 AJ: You mentioned being on the board of PFund. Have you worked for other LGBT and/or 25 volunteered for other LGBT organizations? 26 KDS: Yeah. We do a lot of pro bono or reduced fee work for LGBT non-profits and things. We’ve 27 worked with RECLAIM, we’ve worked kind of tangentially sometimes with OutFront. Gosh, yeah 28 – I’m also on the board of an organization called Still Kickin, which is kind of an organization that 29 just exists to . . . the mission is to help awesome people through awful things – so, it’s basically 30 kind of a consistent . . . just cash and other things for folks. 31 AJ: Is that associated with Still Ain’t Satisfied? 32 KDS: No, no – but I know Still Ain’t Satisfied. Still Kickin is a newer organization and we’ve . . . over 33 the course of kind of my lawyering, I feel like we have dealt with or know folks or feel close to 34 almost every LGBT organization here in town. I feel so lucky to have landed in Minnesota 35 because we just have so much good stuff going on. 36 AJ: Yeah, there’s a lot – it’s a great community. K. Davis Senseman 21 The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies University of Minnesota KDS: I mean we’ve got . . . there’s a lot of issues to still figure out in Minneapolis, there’s 1 a lot of racial 2 disparities, there’s a lot of socio-economic . . . especially in our kids and in our schools. But, I 3 feel like the right people are here to do it. If anywhere is going to get it done, it’s going to be 4 Minneapolis. 5 AJ: Let me ask you this, where . . . is there a trans and gender non-conforming agenda? If you think 6 there is, what is it? And, where do you see the trans community or the transgender, gender 7 non-conforming movement over the next 50 years? 8 KDS: I mean, right now, if someone were to speak about a trans agenda, I would say in this current 9 climate the agenda is let us be alive and let us . . . 10 AJ: Pee. 11 KDS: Yeah, let us use your bathrooms and frequent your businesses. I really respect the trans and 12 gender non-conforming movement because I feel like there is so much more open discussion 13 about intersectionality in that movement. I feel like it is way better. You know, I feel like . . . I 14 feel like a lot of the other movements, kind of like the movement for Black Lives and things like 15 that, those movements have scooped up kind of all of the things that the gay agenda was 16 pushing. 17 AJ: Right. 18 KDS: And have embraced it so well, in a way that I feel like the gay agenda has not embraced the 19 needs and the principles of all the other movements. I was at the Facing Race Conference this 20 year and . . . I was just a tagalong because my partner was going. 21 AJ: In 2016 or 2017? 22 KDS: 2016, I was there. 23 AJ: So, last year. 24 KDS: Last year – it was like the day after the election. It was a perfect place to be. But, you know, all 25 of the name tags – you wrote your pronouns, all of the public bathrooms were unisex 26 bathrooms – were gender-neutral bathrooms, there were signs in all the bathrooms that said, 27 “Is someone giving you a problem? Text this number and someone will come right away.” I 28 thought like . . . the mainstream gay and lesbian, GLBT, movement hasn’t embraced these other 29 intersectionalities, hasn’t embraced the fight against Islamaphobia and the fight for 30 undocumented individuals the way all these other movements have really just kind of made our 31 issues a part of their . . . you know, have just embraced them. 32 AJ: Platforms, yes. 33 KDS: Yeah, and so I think . . . I think, I hope, that the greater gay agenda, it has to become more of a 34 trans and gender non-conforming agenda because that’s where the issues are – that’s where 35 the need is. If you’re a white middle class gay person right now, even this new president isn’t 36 really affecting you that much – your biggest worry was, “Are they going to repeal marriage?” K. Davis Senseman 22 The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies University of Minnesota and every organization said, “No, they’re not going to repeal marriage,” 1 and you just went about 2 your life. 3 AJ: Exactly. As an attorney, can they repeal marriage? 4 KDS: They can’t . . . they won’t repeal marriage, they can strip away at kind of the rights and it can be 5 challenged. 6 AJ: But that’s going to impact every married person, right? 7 KDS: Exactly, yeah. 8 AJ: So, not a lot of people are going to be happy about that. 9 KDS: No, no. And I mean . . . so I hope, so I think there is a trans and gender non-conforming 10 movement. I think right now it’s just a movement for . . . why don’t you see my humanity and 11 give me my human rights which how can that not be the forefront of a greater movement? 12 AJ: Sure. 13 KDS: But I hope that . . . I hope that every LGBT organization is run by people of color and trans folks 14 and gender non-conforming folks and not like easily palatable – like, “Here I am.” I don’t think 15 we’re there yet and I’m fine with doing what we need to do to get there, but I think that’s . . . I 16 think the trans movement and the gender non-conforming movement is going to be . . . it 17 affects everybody, it affects more than just trans people. It affects your kids who you don’t 18 want to be put into a gender box. It affects the value – like saying that women are not inferior 19 to men. There’s a lot of principles that kind of go along with that. 20 AJ Oh, yeah. 21 KDS: And I’m hoping that that’s kind of where this bigger movement against the current political 22 climate will go. And, you know, I feel like there are leaders right now who are talking about that 23 – like Linda Sarsour, I follow everything she does. 24 AJ: Linda? 25 KDS: Linda Sarsour, she is a Palestinian activist, and she is one of the leaders of the women’s march in 26 Washington. 27 AJ: Can you spell her name? 28 KDS: Sure. L-i-n-d-a S-a-r-s-o-u-r. She runs an organization . . . 29 AJ: Sansour? 30 KDS: Sarsour – yes. She’s from New York, she runs an Islamic organization – an Islamic rights 31 organization out of New York. 32 AJ: Sure. 33 KDS: And she is just speaking so eloquently right now about how it’s time to all get together and 34 we’ve got to bring everyone along because we can’t be . . . no one is going to be perfect and K. Davis Senseman 23 The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies University of Minnesota everyone is going to make mistakes but we’re going to kind of do this. 1 And that’s how she 2 stepped into the women’s march – people were saying correctly that there’s nothing 3 intersectional about this, you people who are organizing this don’t have any idea about racial 4 issues and Islamophobia and so they went out and they got a Black woman, a Muslim woman, 5 and a Latina woman and said, “Will you come and run this?” And so, they are. 6 AJ: Are you going? 7 KDS: Yeah, our whole firm is going. 8 AJ: Is that right? 9 KDS: Yes, we’re closing the firm and we’re going. 10 AJ: Wow. 11 KDS: Yeah, I’m excited. I feel like these . . . 12 AJ: So, you’re going to the women’s march in Washington, DC on January 21st, which is sort of this 13 resistance or opposition to the inauguration of President Trump? 14 KDS: Yes. And also kind of a starting place. They’ve been very clear that this won’t be the end of it – 15 you know, come to this march and then go home. But it’s going to be an opportunity for people 16 to kind of learn – they’re having an event about teaching women to run for office. 17 AJ: Yes. 18 KDS: Yeah, I think it’s going to be great. 19 AJ: Oh, my gosh. 20 KDS: I’m really excited to take my law partners. I was like, “Let’s just do this, let’s close it all down 21 and go.” 22 AJ: Wow. I think the future of the movement is in pretty good hands if you’re going to be a part of 23 it. 24 KDS: Thank you. 25 AJ: I really appreciate the opportunity to sit down with you today and for you to contribute your 26 story and history to this project. I think this contribution is certainly as significant as every one of 27 the interviews that I’ve been able to do so far. I just want to say thank you for being in the 28 world and doing the work that you do, Davis. 29 KDS: Well, thank you. And thank you for including me, because like I said, it’s been a journey and I 30 often times have felt like, “Well, I’m not gender non-conforming enough; I’m not trans enough.” 31 And so, I was really excited. 32 AJ: I think that that’s a struggle that many of us share and certainly I myself. But, thank you so 33 much. 34 KDS: Well, thank you. K. Davis Senseman 24 The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies University of Minnesota AJ: Until we meet 1 again, my friend. 2 KDS: All right.