Tygra Slarii Narrator Andrea Jenkins Interviewer The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies University of Minnesota December 26, 2017 The Transgender Oral History Project of the Upper Midwest will empower individuals to tell their story, while providing students, historians, and the public with a more rich foundation of primary source material about the transgender community. The project is part of the Tretter Collection at the University of Minnesota. The archive provides a record of GLBT thought, knowledge and culture for current and future generations and is available to students, researchers and members of the public. The Transgender Oral History Project will collect up to 400 hours of oral histories involving 200 to 300 individuals over the next three years. Major efforts will be the recruitment of individuals of all ages and experiences, and documenting the work of The Program in Human Sexuality. This project will be led by Andrea Jenkins, poet, writer, and trans-activist. Andrea brings years of experience working in government, non-profits and LGBT organizations. If you are interested in being involved in this exciting project, please contact Andrea. Andrea Jenkins jenki120@umn.edu (612) 625-4379 Tygra Slarii 3 The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies University of Minnesota 1 Andrea Jenkins -AJ 2 Tygra Slarii -TS 3 4 AJ: So, hello. 5 TS: Hi. 6 AJ: My name is Andrea Jenkins I am the oral historian for the Transgender Oral History Project at 7 the Tretter Collection at the University of Minnesota. Today is December 26, 2017. And I’m 8 here this morning with Tygra Slarii. 9 TS: Slar-I. 10 AJ: Slarii! I’m so sorry. 11 TS: It’s takes everyone used - to get used to it. 12 AJ: Yeah, well - I’m going to ask you to repeat your name, state your name, spell your name so we 13 make sure we get it spelled right and you don’t have my pronunciation to worry about. Also, 14 Tygra, tell me your gender identity today, your gender identity assigned at birth, and your 15 pronouns. 16 TS: Okay. Well, my name is Tygra Trinity Slarii. Tygra spelled T-Y-G-R-A, Slarii spelled S-L-A-R-I-I. My 17 identity - 18 AJ: And Trinity is just…T-R-I-N-I-T-Y? 19 TS: Yup, there you go! 20 AJ: Okay. 21 TS: My gender pronouns - well, my gender now is female. I am a trans woman. Assigned at birth, I 22 was male. What was the other one? 23 AJ: And your pronoun. 24 TS: Oh. She, hers, they, them, it. 25 AJ: Okay. You don’t smack people when they say it? 26 TS: No, I usually just lead in with shes and hers but when I’m in a more social gathering with people 27 I use they, them, and it. 28 AJ: Okay. Cool. Well, thank you. So Tygra, just to kind of get our memory bank flowing a little bit, 29 can you tell me what your earliest memory in life is? Like, the first thing you remember. 30 TS: Um, my first thing remember...happened when I was four. 31 AJ: Okay. 32 TS: That year of four, I got in to cartoons a lot. And my favorite cartoons at that time were the 33 Thundercats. Tygra Slarii 4 The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies University of Minnesota 1 AJ: Oh, wow. 2 TS: I was a really big Thundercats fan. That’s actually where my name comes from, because there 3 was a character on there named Tygra and I wanted to be her. 4 AJ: Wow. That is so cool. 5 TS: She was - she embodied everything that was like, that right there, I need to be. 6 AJ: So who was Tygra? Tell me who Tygra was on the cartoon. 7 TS: She was like, I think she was second...second...no, she was second in command. And she was 8 kind of the badass. Like, she didn’t take no lip. Even though it was a cartoon, but she still was 9 like, really strong, she was there, she was present, she was the only female in the group that I 10 just focused on, fixated on. She was smart, brilliant, and the fighting moves were of course, top 11 notch. 12 AJ: Okay. Was she sexy? 13 TS: Uh, duh. Her outfit was like this - like, a swimsuit kind of thing that had like, the army belt, and it 14 had a cross on it, like, it came across the breasts, and she had the gun packs, so like - 15 AJ: So they were like superheroes, kind of? 16 TS: Yes, but they were cats. 17 AJ: But they were cats. 18 TS: They were cats. And I’m cat lady, of course, so it all fit. Like when I decided to take on a name, 19 Tygra just seemed fitting. 20 AJ: Wow. And you actually have cats. They’re pets, or…? 21 TS: I do. I have two. And a dog, but the cats are - those are my babies. I have a tuxedo cat named 22 Walter and then I have a Maine Coon, his name is Tiger. Cause I’m vain, so I had to name one of 23 them after me. 24 AJ: Okay. Wow. That’s beautiful, thank you. Where did you grow up? 25 TS: Well, I was born in Omaha, Nebraska. As far as what I know, I spent a couple years there. And 26 then we moved to Arizona where I finished my upbringing there. And then I attended my senior 27 year of high school in Omaha, Nebraska. So I did a back and forth kind of thing. But what 28 brought me back to Omaha was to reconnect with my family. And that’s where I ended up going 29 to college, and I ended up liking it so I stayed longer. 30 AJ: That’s cool. So what was it like growing up in Arizona? 31 TS: Hot. 32 AJ: Were you in Phoenix, or…? 33 TS: I lived in Glendale for a little bit. Tygra Slarii 5 The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies University of Minnesota AJ: Glendale. So right outside 1 of Phoenix area? 2 TS: Yup. And then we moved to Scottsdale. Friendly - Arizona was friendly. At this time of my male 3 life I was being flamboyantly gay. 4 AJ: Really, okay. 5 TS: Very out there. I was very...tight clothing, really eccentric hand movements and voice talking. 6 AJ: And this was while you’re a young child? 7 TS: Yup, I was thirteen, all the way up until I was seventeen. 8 AJ: Wow. 9 TS: But that’s when it really started to peek, like who I was, when I was thirteen, really started to 10 peek out. The mannerisms, the loudmouth talking, the sissy in my walk, as you would say, really 11 started to peek at that point. And of course I got the stares and the hows and the whys but 12 everyone was pretty - anything that was negative wasn’t said to my face. 13 AJ: Directly to you. 14 TS: It was said around me. So like, if I was in a presence of somebody, in a room no one was like, in 15 my face telling me that you need to die, you’re ugly, or this is a sin, or anything like that. It 16 wasn’t brought to my attention unless people were like “Hey, someone said such and such 17 about you,” and I was of the philosophy that if you can’t say it to my face, then it’s none of my 18 business. 19 AJ: Yeah. It doesn’t matter, right? 20 TS: Exactly. 21 AJ: So you weren’t bullied, and that kind of stuff in school? 22 TS: No, I didn’t really get the whole bullying side of my identity, which kind of sometimes makes me 23 not empathetic to a lot of the people in my community, because I didn’t get - 24 AJ: You didn’t experience it. 25 TS: I didn’t have that. I wasn’t - I didn’t get tortured, or beat up, there wasn’t things written on my 26 locker, or you know, aside from that, of course I have my family members who had their nose up 27 at me or didn’t talk to me or didn’t want me around, but I never got - I needed to kill myself, or 28 that you should be ashamed of who you were. And coming from a black family, that’s typically 29 the first installments you get when you come out. 30 AJ: Yeah. 31 TS: It’s, you’re a shame to the family. You - this is wrong, this is not who you’re supposed to be, a 32 strong black man, and you’re a black woman, and, oh, we’re not going to have grandkids now. 33 But none of that was thrown at me. 34 AJ: That was not the reality that you had to deal with. Tygra Slarii 6 The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies University of Minnesota TS: I had a very 1 good upbringing. 2 AJ: Nice. 3 TS: My parents did love me, and certain people in my family did love me. 4 AJ: Uh huh. I’m glad to hear that, ‘cause you’re right. I mean, so many trans identified or gender 5 nonconforming people really do face a lot of discrimination in their families. Let alone outside of 6 their families. So how many - did you have brothers and sisters? 7 TS: I have three brothers. I’m the second oldest. So I have an older brother Anthony who’s seven 8 years and seven months exactly older than me. And then Devonte, he’s a year and two months 9 younger than me. And then Paris, who’s my twin, he’s five years younger than me. 10 AJ: And you guys look a lot alike, when you say your twin? 11 TS: Oh, me and Paris? Yes, we - he’s identical to me. He’s just a little bit darker, but he - that’s my 12 mini-me. 13 AJ: Okay. Wow. 14 TS: He’s the one who I actually, like, latched on to when his upbringing, because, um, not saying 15 that my mother was a bad mother, but being the second oldest, there were a lot of 16 responsibilities put on me. 17 AJ: Sure. 18 TS: That I didn’t think would be put on me. So I ended up raising my younger brother. 19 AJ: Did you - so, did you grow up in a household where your mom and dad were intact? 20 TS: Well, first - I am adopted. My adoptive parents passed. My biological parents were not together, 21 but I know who they are. So coming to find out that I had this family and coming to meeting this 22 family and now being around such and such - we’re together now, but...what’s the word I’m 23 looking for? It was a strange kind of relationship. 24 AJ: So you have three brothers. Were you guys all adopted together? 25 TS: No. Shannon had Devonte, Paris, and Anthony. And then me, was on the other side. 26 AJ: And you were in Arizona. Your adoptive family was in Arizona. 27 TS: Yes. 28 AJ: Okay. And then you went back. Your family, is, I assume, in Omaha? 29 TS: Yes. That’s where my biological family is. And so one of the things is that I moved back there, 30 and then I stayed with my aunt Theresa, that’s where I finished up my senior year of high school. 31 Knew of Shannon, who is my biological mother. Started working on that friendship there. That’s 32 also where my biological father was. And one of my goals is finding him. ‘Cause like, there was 33 some connection when I was growing up, of knowing who he was, and he was in and out, but 34 never, like, there enough where I can actually grab that - Tygra Slarii 7 The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies University of Minnesota AJ: 1 Get to know him. 2 TS: Yes. And then this was my chance to actually get to know this man, and actually ask some 3 questions, like why weren’t you a part of my life? 4 AJ: So you were able to meet him? 5 TS: Yes. His name’s DeWayne. He’s a good man by my standards, and he hasn’t said or done 6 anything bad to me. I know how him and Shannon’s relationship did not work. 7 AJ: That happens. 8 TS: And it didn’t work. But, as far as I’m concerned, like, even when I came out to him as a trans 9 woman, I didn’t get the whole “That’s not my…” Used pronouns correctly right from there and I 10 haven’t had any issues. 11 AJ: That’s awesome. How about your mom? How about Shannon? 12 TS: She...different story. She, on the other hand, took a while to come around. She wasn’t so on 13 gear with the whole transition - which there was a part where she still used wrong pronouns and 14 the wrong identity and the birth name versus, as I would tell her, this is who I am. This is...like, 15 this is my identity, this is my pronouns, please use the correct - here, say - and then and it was 16 not facilitated for a couple years, which is different from now. That we’ve like we’ve had a 17 conversation where I was just like, “Look. You want to be a part of my life? This is what comes 18 along with a part of my life. Okay, so it’s either we’re gonna use the right pronouns, or you’re 19 going to call me by what I identify as, or you’re just not going to be in my life.” And I have no 20 problem cutting people off, and if that’s a tie that I need to break, it’s a tie I need to break. 21 Which is different from my three younger brothers. My three brothers, not just three - because 22 they like having a sister. 23 AJ: Cool! So they’re cool. 24 TS: They’re cool. I had, like, Paris and Devonte are my overprotective, and Anthony, he’s coming 25 around, but still respects me. 26 AJ: Yes. 27 TS: To not...you know, disrespect me in any way. Actually, he was a relationship that I just repaired 28 before I moved here. I went and had dinner at his house you know, with him and his wife and 29 his kids, and we got to talk and hash things out, and leave on a good note, because that was one 30 of the relationships that I didn’t have. Like, I got the mom, I got my dad, I got my two younger 31 ones, that was the one that I didn’t have. 32 AJ: That was kind of out there, huh? 33 TS: Yeah. 34 AJ: That’s awesome - well, and that kind of leads into...You actually just moved to Minneapolis. 35 TS: I did. A week ago. Tygra Slarii 8 The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies University of Minnesota 1 AJ: Wow. 2 TS: Uprooted my life. 3 AJ: From Omaha. 4 TS: From Omaha. 5 AJ: What do you think so far? 6 TS: It’s colder. It’s colder here. A lot colder. 7 AJ: Yes it is. A lot colder. 8 TS: From what I’ve got to see, the community is a lot stronger. And I mean the trans community. 9 AJ: The...the trans community. 10 TS: It’s a lot stronger from what I’m used to, and I’m not downing Omaha, Nebraska’s drag scene, 11 trans community, but it’s just - it’s a lot stronger. There’s a lot more people, more are worried 12 about politics than about who’s sleeping with who, who may have what STD or whose drugged 13 or strung out, or who’s escorting or whatever. People here are a little more on the issues. And 14 that’s nice to see. I’m not saying there’s not people in the Omaha community that don’t want to 15 fight the power, it’s just a small group, and a small area, so not everyone’s in the same board 16 here - and then here, walking in, I’m like, okay! All right, Minneapolis, get it together! It’s nice to 17 just see that no one’s trying to one up the other trans person. 18 AJ: And cut each other down. 19 TS: Exactly. Like, it’s not a game. Once you defeat one trans person or date one trans person, or 20 friends, you don’t elevate yourself on a level to be with a whole ‘nother trans group. We’re all in 21 the same level. And that’s something that’s - not just happening in the Omaha community, but it 22 happens in a lot of trans… 23 AJ: Oh, I think it does. Absolutely. 24 TS: Communities, everyone wants to be better than the next, which some people are like, “I gotta 25 get boobs because she has boobs, or I gotta get bigger boobs because she has big boobs.” I’m 26 like...just… 27 AJ: Just do you, stay in your lane… 28 TS: Exactly! 29 AJ: Well, I’m glad that you’re experiencing Minneapolis that way. I do think some of that exists here 30 too. 31 TS: I just haven’t touched it. 32 AJ: You just haven’t touched it yet. Because people are people no matter where they are in the 33 world. But I do - I mean, I agree, that there is a very strong sort of politically active trans 34 community here. Tygra Slarii 9 The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies University of Minnesota TS: I would say brotherhood, sisterhood. That talk of what you hear from other 1 communities, like, 2 that happen here. Like, when I first came here, and the first time I met you was at the - um… 3 AJ: The trans equity summit. Yes. 4 TS: Yes, and that’s the first time I met you. And I walked in and didn’t - there were no, like, who’s 5 this girl. 6 AJ: Right. No shade. 7 TS: Right. I hugged about six or seven people and they were like, oh hi! And I was like...hey! Like, so 8 like - to get that response, it was just...it was a little overwhelming. 9 AJ: Oh wow. 10 TS: Than, to like, to walk in and like, you know, people, A. turn their backs because they don’t know 11 you or just won’t talk to you because they’re uninterested in what you have going on. 12 AJ: Wow. Tygra, when did you first realize that you were not the gender you were assigned at birth. 13 TS: I was twenty-one. 14 AJ: Really. 15 TS: And I know everyone - I feel like when people ask that question, they want some story, like, “Oh 16 my god, when I was younger I just knew!” 17 AJ: No, I want your - I want your story! There is more than one single story. 18 TS: I’ve always been - I describe it as, I’ve always been female antics. Like, I’ve always had female 19 tendencies. I’ve always had woman tendencies. But my brain was going through what I call 20 moments. Like, I have female moments, that were. Yeah, you is, but your brain still thinks that 21 you’re a gay man. So it comes off being really flamboyant. And it wasn’t until I was twenty-one, 22 that’s when I really started getting into, oh, what is trans, what is transitioning, what are 23 hormones, and that’s when Google, my best friend, was really, like, a hard on information tool 24 for me. And then I started just researching, but I still wasn’t ready to transition. I still didn’t fully 25 understand enough to be like, oh. I’m a woman. I was a curious, flamboyant gay male who 26 didn’t fit in the box that he fit himself into at that time and was questioning who she was. And 27 that’s kind of where Tygra really took off, ‘cause that’s when I started drag. 28 AJ: Okay. So you’re a drag performer. 29 TS: Yeah. So I started doing drag, and that was like, how I lived vicariously. 30 AJ: Oh, okay. 31 TS: Through, was Tygra, where I still had Tristan, on this other side, still questioning, still molding, 32 still not sure, but Tygra got to flourish. 33 AJ: Right. And live. 34 TS: And get called - and live, the way that she wanted to, and then those came to a medium when I Tygra Slarii 10 The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies University of Minnesota was twenty three years old, when I was 1 like. All right. 2 AJ: It’s time. 3 TS: It’s time. So that’s when I started to seek out the help that I needed, and now I am exact - I’m 4 comfortable. 5 AJ: So did you go to therapy or something? 6 TS: Yes. I did take the steps of going to therapy, but that wasn’t until...nine months ago. 7 AJ: Okay. 8 TS: So like, I lived my life for two years as Tygra, and then I sought out therapy help to start the 9 hormone process to actually fully embody the woman I am. 10 AJ: So you’re on hormones. 11 TS: I am. 12 AJ: Oh wow. 13 TS: I am. 14 AJ: What is that like? 15 TS: Uh, the first three months are emotional. I can tell you that. My eating habits are the same, I’m 16 still like the same, but a lot more emotional. 17 AJ: You didn’t just start eating up everything in the world? 18 TS: That was me before hormones! 19 AJ: Oh, okay. 20 TS: So that - I’m always eating, which now I have to monitor my eating, because I’m also diabetic. I 21 have to. But I’ve always been one of those people that’s like, “You eating again girl?” Yes, I’m 22 hungry! 23 AJ: Don’t clown me! 24 TS: I’m just a lot more emotional. Things that typically wouldn’t bother me, or I would just let slide, 25 or - they bother me now. 26 AJ: So do you cry watching soap operas and stuff? 27 TS: Yes. 28 AJ: I know, it’s such a cliche, but it’s real, though, right? 29 TS: You’re getting all that estrogen! You put that estrogen in your body, and you’re just like...all 30 right. Supposed to be cool. 31 AJ: That Tide commercial was so cute! Tygra Slarii 11 The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies University of Minnesota TS: And it’s funny, because I’m sure my boyfriend is just looks at me sometimes 1 and is just 2 like...come here, baby. Come here. 3 AJ: Oh, wow. Man. So, twenty one, you first had the realization. Twenty three, everything sort of 4 came together. 5 TS: That’s when I was like...just go. It was kind of like an experiment for me at first. I was like, let me 6 buy a bra. 7 AJ: Right. 8 TS: Let me buy some girl clothes. ‘Cause I - like, I had girl clothing - for the show - 9 AJ: For the show. 10 TS: But I was like, for just clothes - these are clothes I wear out, I’m not trying to be Lady President 11 Obama, every day, because that’s how my style is, I wear very - I like my little dresses that, with 12 the belt and the nice jacket and the hair. That’s who I am. 13 AJ: So you’re giving them Michelle. 14 TS: Yes! Like that’s the kind of style that I like to - cause, it’s all how you carry yourself. 15 AJ: She’s a classy woman. 16 TS: So I, like, that’s the style I wanted to achieve. 17 AJ: Yeah. 18 TS: And the - but I was like, you need some jeans, you need some nice little dresses, you need to - 19 so I started to play around, and that’s when I was like, okay. We’re going to do this. Every day. 20 AJ: Who was your drag persona? I mean, like, who do you serve? 21 TS: Idolize? 22 AJ: Idolize, or who do you perform on stage, is what I’m trying to say. 23 TS: I take - 24 AJ: Like, who do you embody. 25 TS: I kind of embody Cat Woman. I - like, the way I move on stage, it’s very - I would say elegant, but 26 she’s like, fierce. Like, her presence - you’re going to be captivated by. So I kind of try to put 27 people in trances. Like when I do it, like, watch my words, but also watch my hips. Not only 28 watch my hips, now watch my legs move. Now just watch the legs, now watch my feet move. 29 ‘Cause I’m a dancer! 30 AJ: So do you perform, like, Rihanna, or - 31 TS: I’m a mix girl. 32 AJ: - Beyonce, or - Tygra Slarii 12 The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies University of Minnesota 1 TS: I’m not a - 2 AJ: J-Lo, or…? 3 TS: Hm, I’m more of a mix girl, like. I like mixes, so I like four different songs in one song. 4 AJ: Oh, okay. 5 TS: So I don’t just like to be like, “Oh, I’mma just do like a three - “ 6 AJ: I’mma just do Jennifer Holiday and that’s it. 7 TS: Yeah, I can’t do that. So I like to put these mixes together, or I tell somebody to put these mixes 8 together. 9 AJ: Okay. So do you - are you a DJ mixer too? 10 TS: No! But I tell someone to put these mixes together, and I happily will pay them, and that’s pretty 11 much - I like seven minute, like, mixes. 12 AJ: Oh, wow. So you’re doing, like, a long - 13 TS: I’m a dancer! So I’mma give you everything I possibly can, on stage. I like the buildup. So I like it 14 to be slow, and then I take off that cape, or whatever I got on covering the outfit, and then you 15 get the whole wha-bam, and I’mma dance for you. 16 AJ: Oh my goodness. You’re a dancer, I’ve gotta come see you on stage. 17 TS: I am. Dancing is my life. It’s been a part of my life for a very long time. 18 AJ: Really. Oh, wow. Modern, hip hop…? 19 TS: Hip hop, jazz, modern, tap, musical theatre, all of that is my repertoire, and it’s - it was my 20 escape when I was going through depression. 21 AJ: Have you been on stage outside of drag? 22 TS: I have. I did a lot of theater things in Omaha, Nebraska, and there was one showcase called 23 Broadway Dreams that I was able to be a part of, where they take a lot of the young actors and 24 dancers and singers and they bring them all to this camp that lasts a week. 25 AJ: Oh, wow. 26 TS: And you get to learn from actual Broadway actors and actresses and singers and dancers, kind of 27 learning the business, and then at the end of that week, you do this whole big showcase. 28 AJ: Oh, wow. 29 TS: And it’s… 30 AJ: So did everyone perform one show together, or everybody did different - their own thing? 31 TS: It’s one big show together, but we were like, you do pieces. So like, me being a dancer, I don’t 32 sing. I can sing. I don’t sing, because I don’t think my voice sounds all that pretty. So - like, one of Tygra Slarii 13 The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies University of Minnesota the dances I did was put it - darn it, what’s the name of that song? 1 We did Aquarius, and then 2 we did, I think it’s On the Roof? Puttin’ On The Ritz. There it is, that’s what we did. I’m like, what 3 song is that? And that was a tap one, it was just, everyone, it was like, at least ten or fifteen of 4 us in each act. But the Broadway performers performed with us, so it wasn’t just us kids by 5 ourselves. So that’s, like, my first kind of taste of real theater, but like, I was always involved in 6 high school, and then show choir. 7 AJ: Community, and… 8 TS: Mmhmm. Those were all my favorite things. 9 AJ: Wow. A performer. I love it. 10 TS: Not so much of my life now. I stay away from theater now. 11 AJ: Really? 12 TS: It’s not much of...a fulfilling thing for me. I definitely will help out if I can, if I can offer, but I’m 13 more, like, drag has just been that hobby that’s fulfilled me in every way that I want to be 14 fulfilled. 15 AJ: Sure. But - is it - have you - is it that you’re not involved in theater now because you’re trans, 16 or…? 17 TS: Just - it was - it’s just not fulfilling enough. 18 AJ: ...and you don’t see a role, you don’t see roles for trans people, or…? 19 TS: I don’t see a lot of roles for trans people. They’re normally casted by cis people. 20 AJ: How do you feel about that? ‘Cause I know that’s a big thing in Hollywood. 21 TS: Acting is great. Acting is amazing. But you’re never going to really give off the feeling of a trans 22 tragedy or a trans epidemic or a trans life if you haven’t lived it. 23 AJ: Yeah. 24 TS: So like, you can be a beggar, anyone can be a beggar, not everyone can be a trans woman. Not 25 everyone can be a trans man. These are not just things you - we decided to pick up and decide 26 that one day “I want to be a trans woman.” I didn’t wake up and say “I wanna somehow be 27 depicted by cis white or cis black or cis men and possibly hanged, stabbed, raped, run over, 28 burned to fire,” like - that wasn’t a life that I was like, okay! This fits me. Let me go ahead and 29 live it. So how can you live on the screen and act as that when you don’t know what it’s really 30 like. 31 AJ: Right. The sacrifices that people make to become who they are. 32 TS: Yes. And you’re not giving so much of the bad, you’re giving the positive. You’re showing the 33 happiness, sunshine and daisies of being a trans woman or trans man, not what really it is to be 34 that person. 35 AJ: What is it really? Like, what have been some of the challenges that you’ve faced since you’ve Tygra Slarii 14 The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies University of Minnesota 1 come out? 2 TS: It’s mentally frustrating. To - one of the things I’ve had a hard time coming against is body 3 dysphoria. 4 AJ: Yeah? 5 TS: I - I, looking down at my body before hormones and seeking the help, I hated this body. 6 AJ: Really? 7 TS: This body was not what I wanted to be. This body is not what I wanted to wake up to. I’m - it’s 8 nice that people like to say, “Oh, you have nice muscles.” Yeah, but what woman do you see 9 that you’re attracted to that has nice muscles? 10 AJ: Sabrina Williams! Have you seen her? That girl is stacked! 11 TS: She’s stacked. And - 12 AJ: Everywhere! Arms, abs... 13 TS: She’s - and for me, but for me, that answer wasn’t good enough. 14 AJ: Right. No. I hear you. 15 TS: Because it wasn’t what I wanted. 16 AJ: It’s you. It’s all about you. Yeah. 17 TS: Not only that, but dating. I - wanting to have sex. 18 AJ: Right. 19 TS: Like, without somebody thinking you’re an escort, or a hooker, or a prostitute, which it’s great if 20 that’s what you want to do, but not all trans women are like that. 21 AJ: Right. 22 TS: And I’m one of those women who’s not like that. 23 AJ: Right, exactly. You work? You went to school? 24 TS: I have a full time job, yes, school, work, I’m… I work a 8-5, Monday through Friday, no 25 weekends, and I enjoy that. I like being full and -- of my body. What’s another thing? I guess one 26 of the really hardest things is judgment from your outside people. And it’s not just cis society, 27 it’s in your own community. 28 AJ: Right. Within the trans community. 29 TS: I mean the gay community first. Because we get it harshly from the gay community, and then on 30 top of that we get it from the trans community, so it’s like this tier that just knocks everyone 31 down. And it’s okay if you don’t understand, but if you don’t try to educate yourself, why waste 32 my time trying to educate you? Tygra Slarii 15 The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies University of Minnesota AJ: Right. Yeah. Those are some of the challenges. What about with police, or medical 1 institutions? 2 TS: It’s so nice to be misgendered when you go to the hospital, or...if you’re not made of money and 3 to get your name legally changed. And those process, like, police, doctor, school, and you can 4 tell them until you’re blue in the face that you want to be called such and such and such and 5 such, but you’re always gonna get misgendered. Without that piece of paper that says this is 6 who I am, so, I guess, like, for me, was misgendering. ‘Cause I don’t have so much of a feminine 7 voice. It’s pretty masculine. Some days. Depending on which side of the bed I wake up on. So 8 like, you know, I haven’t had problems with police officers in that way, of getting stopped and 9 showing my ID, or, you know, they look at it, look at you, look at it, look at you kind of thing? But 10 definitely, like, in school. 11 AJ: Yeah. 12 TS: “Is Tristan here?” Tygra. “But that’s not what’s on here.” Well, I’m telling you. It’s Tygra. “But - “ 13 No, I’m telling you. ‘Cause then, when that happens, what that does, is your peers, who are 14 sitting in the classroom with you, just heard a name that you don’t identify with, and exactly 15 when people hear your birth name, that’s exactly what they want to identify you as. They don’t 16 care about whatever name you else want to go by. They care about that. 17 AJ: Whatever else you - yeah. They don’t care what they’ve been calling you for the last three years, 18 now that they heard this - 19 TS: They get that name - that’s what it is. 20 AJ: Yeah. 21 TS: And then that’s a really big stressful part of it, ‘cause that goes into you wanting to hate 22 yourself. ‘Cause now you’re just like, people don’t validate who I am anymore, just because they 23 know this name. 24 AJ: Right. 25 TS: So it becomes a conflicting… 26 AJ: What about dating? So do you tell people your identity…? When do you tell people your 27 identity? 28 TS: Right off the bat. I have no reason to hide. Like, I went through - I guess you could say I spent my 29 whole life hiding who Tygra was. I’m done hiding. There’s no reason for me to hide who I am. 30 You’re not going to get to love these hips, these not-so-birth breasts, this smile, that I guess 31 lights up a room, then...move on! 32 AJ: Move on around. 33 TS: And I’m happy that I found someone who validates the woman that I am and wants to be seen 34 with me. 35 AJ: So you’re in a relationship. 36 TS: I am! Tygra Slarii 16 The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies University of Minnesota 1 AJ: Yeah? 2 TS: His name is Damon Kelsey. He’s my boo boo. Love him. He’s my world, actually. 3 AJ: How long have you guys been together? 4 TS: Seven months. So we’re still freshly new. But it’s nice - 5 AJ: God, I must have met you guys when you first started hanging out! 6 TS: You did. Cause that - that is, September, I think that was. 7 AJ: At the wedding? 8 TS: Oh, no, I wasn’t at the wedding. 9 AJ: You didn’t come to the wedding. 10 TS: I didn’t come to the wedding, that’s when we first dating. Oh, Liz and Sean’s? 11 AJ: ‘Cause I heard about you. He was all enamored, and he...in love, and he told me all about you, 12 and then we met in September. So you’re right. 13 TS: Yeah. Cause I was like, wait, we met in September! But you were talking about Damon. Yup. He 14 walked in my life at the right time. I was just getting out of a relationship where I wasn’t being 15 validated in, and that’s kind of how relationships go for me, you know, I’m okay with showing 16 you the male physical Tristan is, but once I started to show the signs of wanting to actually by 17 myself? They weren’t having it. It just wasn’t meant to be. And I went through nine months of 18 really hard thinking and really, like, trying to figure out what was going to make me happy, 19 where did I fit in this world, was I making the right decision on being a trans woman, and going 20 through the process of wanting to be myself, was it worth it? And I met Damon. And it made, 21 somewhat, everything a hundred percent. Like there were still things that I was going through 22 that I was like “Um….” But he saw who Tygra was, and wanted to be around it, and wanted to 23 love it and nurture it and be a part of his life as well. 24 AJ: Wow. That’s beautiful. 25 TS: So. I’m happy. 26 AJ: So you date men? 27 TS: I’m pansexual. So I date personalities. 28 AJ: Okay. 29 TS: If your personality inflects with mine, then we can talk, we can definitely have a conversation, 30 dates, and see where that goes. I’ve dated some women in my past, I typically go for lesbians. 31 AJ: Okay. 32 TS: But I’ve dated along the spectrum of people. 33 AJ: So your sexual orientation is pansexual. Tygra Slarii 17 The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies University of Minnesota 1 TS: Mmhm. 2 AJ: What have been some of the various ways that you have identified yourself over time? You’ve 3 already said you kind of identified as a gay man. A trans woman. 4 TS: Queer is the new kind of, like, um, identity that’s coming up. 5 AJ: For you? 6 TS: For me. And I’m not really understanding the queer society and all that it entails, but there are 7 some qualities in it that I’ve seen that I’m like...so you’re not, there’s no gender roles, you can 8 depict to you decide you feel like in the morning. 9 AJ: Sure. 10 TS: And I’m learning that that doesn’t devalue my trans identity, it just means that if I want to dress 11 in baggy pants and a nice shirt, I can do that. If I want to put on my heels one day, and throw 12 this hair up in a bun and put some makeup on, I can do that. So it kind of, like, throws away that 13 “You have to fit this mode to be this character,” you’re kind of characterless. 14 AJ: It explodes the binary notions around gender. 15 TS: Exactly. And I - 16 AJ: Male or female, right? 17 TS: That boggled me. ‘Cause like, I - those traits are taught. Being male and female are taught. Men, 18 as we’re growing up, we’re told boys don’t play with girl things. We don’t paint our nails. We’re 19 not supposed to be weak. We’re supposed to be strong. Defend. For the family women, we 20 were supposed to cook. Be in the kitchen, and, you know, follow the man’s rules, and then being 21 queer, it’s kind of just like...you be whoever the fuck you want to be. You feel like you want to 22 have some male-like and female tendencies today? That’s your thing. So that’s comforting. I’m 23 still not understanding of it one hundred percent, but - I’m happy that that’s there. 24 AJ: But you rolling. 25 TS: That that gives a lot more people who still don’t feel a part of a certain community - you have 26 somewhere to go. 27 AJ: Yeah. More space. More space for more people. Was there, like, a specific moment or person or 28 organization that made you say at twenty one, “I think I’m not the right - this is not who I am”? 29 TS: Hmm. To be honest, there - well, no. There was someone. I don’t typically like to talk about him, 30 but. My ex. His name’s Brody Bartlett. 31 AJ: Broodie? 32 TS: Brody. 33 AJ: Brody, okay. 34 TS: Yeah. He was the first trans guy I ever dated. He met me when I was technically Tygra, trying to Tygra Slarii 18 The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies University of Minnesota transition - like, move my life, trying to figure out who I was. But he saw that 1 woman inside. He 2 fell for Tristan. But Tygra came kind of down the line. But he was the person who kind of was 3 like…”You’re trans. I see you. You’re trans.” Like, he told me that - after we had started dating 4 for a little bit, “I knew you were trans when I met you.” And that kind of, like, threw me, I’m like, 5 “How the hell did you fucking know I was trans when you met me? That doesn’t make sense, 6 how did you know?” And he helped and then didn’t help my transition. So. But he was the 7 person who helped Tygra flourish and get me on the right track. 8 AJ: Did you ever meet any, like, trans women who were helpful, or…? 9 TS: Not at that time. Especially in Omaha, there weren’t any. 10 AJ: Really. 11 TS: Not to my recollection, there weren’t any. 12 AJ: Okay, sure. Yeah, I’m sure there are trans women. 13 TS: Yeah, I’m sure they were somewhere, but they just weren’t part of the community. 14 AJ: Right, exactly. 15 TS: And then like, a year down the line, there was - one of my friends, her name’s Charisma, she 16 started to transition. So I kind of got the firsthand of seeing her transition, because she would 17 post things and talk about things when she was in shows and hearsay. And then another one of 18 my friends, Giselle, Giselle Jacobs, she started to transition, so I got to hear that - they gave me 19 the courage to be like. All right. I can do this. But there wasn’t someone who was like, I would 20 say, I idolize you, and whatever you are, I just need to be. 21 AJ: Yeah. I need to be that. So, what is it like being a drag performer, like, what is that world like? Is 22 everybody trans? I mean, I know the answers to these questions, but I want to hear it from your 23 perspective. 24 TS: It’s Hollywood. It’s a Hollywood effect. You start to get a fan base, you start to get people who 25 like you, they throw money at you. If you’re someone who’s of the - everyone’s good at drag, 26 but there’s like, kind of like, your stars, and then your sub stars, and - there’s.. 27 AJ: Yeah, supporting actresses. 28 TS: Yeah, so like, you know, if you’re one of those people who has that hunger to want to achieve, 29 like, you’ll start to travel, and you get to meet other people, so it’s kind of like the Hollywood 30 effect, is what I call it. And yes, your typical - a lot of girls who end up doing drag somewhat end 31 up becoming, realizing that they are trans. Or, if they’re a male performer, who are just, 32 lesbians, they do male illusionist, and they find out that they’re actually trans. And it’s an 33 escape, when we - for me it was an escape. I got to actually live the life that I wanted to be for 34 six to four hours at a time through a weekend. So like, Thursday through Sunday I got to be 35 Tigra, and that was the most gratifying moments of my life, because I was authentically myself. I 36 wasn’t like, “Who’s going to see me as a crossdresser?” Or “Who’s going to say something 37 about, oh, you’re this or you’re this!” No, everyone was surrounded by the same abundance of Tygra Slarii 19 The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies University of Minnesota love, and we all wanted to be there, we all wanted to achieve, we all wanted to 1 go out there and 2 make some money, so like...the escape turned into life. 3 AJ: Do you make good money? 4 TS: I do make some good moneys. 5 AJ: Do you think that trans - that drag performers, female illusionist, male - I don’t know how to say, 6 impersonators, that’s not the language I’m looking for, sort of male.. 7 TS: Performers? 8 AJ: Performers, are they a part of the trans community in your mind? 9 TS: No. There’s the drag community. And then the drag community is split up. ‘Cause then you got 10 your actual drag queens who put on the tons of makeup, and then you got your female 11 impersonators, who are - want the aesthetic of actually looking like a female but are still boys. 12 And then you’ve got your showgirls, who - I call the transgirls, or the showgirls. So we’re the girls 13 who actually are trans women who have ta-tas, and we give you the showgirl effect - burlesque 14 style. And then you have your male performers, and then your male illusionists. And there’s 15 always a tit for tat between the drag queens and the trans girls, just like the male performers 16 and the male illusionists, because there are certain pageants that we can do, there’s certain 17 events that happen that certain people get invited to who are of the certain culture, and the 18 others are like, left behind. So there’s always that tit for tat. Which in some communities it may 19 work, but from what I’ve seen there’s some communities that it just - 20 AJ: They’re totally separate, huh. 21 TS: Exactly. 22 AJ: Wow. That’s interesting, because, you know, personally, I - you know, a lot of my early sort of 23 mentoring and support and love and family came from within the drag community, even 24 though many of them only considered themselves to be drag queens or - you know, I mean, 25 they do their shows at night, but during the day, they were Billy or Bobby or, you know? And 26 they had no intentions of ever transitioning or becoming or living their lives as women or 27 anything like that. But I’ve seen - I’ve noticed that many people nowadays really want to 28 distance themselves from the drag community and kind of equate that it’s not...a part of the 29 broader trans umbrella, so...I was just curious as to your thoughts. 30 TS: I think it all goes into like, the aesthetic. If it doesn’t effect their description of what drag should 31 be, then I don’t want to be a part of it. Their aesthetic is not moding with what they see and feel 32 it should be. Which is why I don’t call myself a drag performer. I’m a showgirl. 33 AJ: Showgirl. I love it. Yeah. I’m going to use that language. And you travel? 34 TS: I do. 35 AJ: So what kind of shows do you do? Are they, like, in a club where there are many performers, or 36 do you go and you’re like the only performer? Tygra Slarii 20 The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies University of Minnesota TS: I haven’t been - there’s only been twice I’ve been the only performer, 1 and it’s been at weddings 2 - there are two weddings that I’ve done that I was - they were just like, we want you to come 3 and do a couple numbers. 4 AJ: Oh wow. 5 TS: Okay! But most of what I do is just in bars. Like, where I’m going to be going in a couple weeks is 6 Wisconsin, which has a beautiful drag scene. Like, if you ever need to see a drag scene that’s like 7 sisterhood and loving, that is a drag scene. 8 AJ: Yeah! Where in Wisconsin? 9 TS: Um, I’m going to be in Milwaukee, and then I’ll be in Madison. But Milwaukee has a bar called 10 Hamburger Mary’s. 11 AJ: Okay. 12 TS: So it’s like, a dine-in bar so you come to eat, and you get a show. It’s kind of burlesque style, but 13 you come eat and you do the show and it’s normally just three girls and we all do three numbers 14 each when we get our coins coins, and from there normally girls get booked down at LaCage, 15 which is down the street from Hamburger Mary’s, which is actually like, your gay scene bar, 16 which is huge. It’s fucking huge. 17 AJ: Wow. 18 TS: They have two levels, the downstairs is - what the hell do they call it? - well they have a 19 downstairs, I don’t remember what they call it. And then they have an upstairs on Saturdays 20 that’s called LaCage, where it’s actually like more sit-down, more relaxed, so if you’re someone 21 who’s older, you want to go on Saturday nights versus Friday nights, because the young crowd -- 22 AJ: Friday night, turning up. 23 TS: Yes. All the dancin’ and booty shakin’ and everything around it. So typically what I do is in bars. 24 AJ: Wow. When are you going? When is this show? 25 TS: I’ll be there February tenth through the thirteenth. So I’m really excited for that. Every time I go, 26 I used to hold a title in Madison, I was Miss Five Nightclub Plus - 27 AJ: Miss…? 28 TS: Miss Five - Nightclub - Plus. I wasn’t just the queen, I was the plus. They welcomed me with 29 open arms. Like, I was a girl from Omaha Nebraska, did not know anything about this bar before 30 I ran, I knew none of these girls before I ran, I just said “I heard about the pageant through the 31 grapevine,” and was like - I’m going to give that a try. And we drove up, me and my team, we 32 drove up. I did the pageant, I ended up winning, and - my year as Miss Five Nightclub Plus is by 33 far one of the - it’s one of like, the epitome, not the epitome but that year I will never forget. 34 AJ: The pinnacle, huh? 35 TS: Yes. Because, like, that’s where I was like, my drag has reached a point where I know that I feel Tygra Slarii 21 The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies University of Minnesota great about whatever thing I’m doing, and it’s because I was surrounded 1 by so many people 2 who loved authentically who I was, and my art and saw my hunger and they enjoyed being 3 around it. 4 AJ: So - Five is the name of the bar? 5 TS: Five Nightclub is the name of the bar. 6 AJ: Oh, okay. And you were Miss Five… 7 TS: Plus. 8 AJ: Plus. 9 TS: I don’t look plus, but I was plus! At that time when I ran for that pageant, I was plus. Not so plus 10 now. Mama done lost some weight. 11 AJ: You’re beautiful, honey. I mean, you’re stunning. Have there been times when people have 12 been either really helpful or really insensitive to you because of your trans identity? 13 TS: It’s kind of like the thing when people take it and then turn it on themselves. Like, when I first 14 came out, I was like, “I’m trans.” “Oh, I thought I was trans at one point too.” 15 AJ: Oh. That hurts. 16 TS: Great! We’re talking - I’m coming to you and telling you a really big part of my life that I just 17 discovered, and we’re gonna talk about - 18 AJ: And you’re turning it around - and making it about you. 19 TS: Exactly. I got a lot of that, and like, “Why? Like, why would you want to do that to yourself,” or 20 like, “Why would you want to put yourself in that place. Do you not watch the news?” Yeah, I 21 watch the news, just like everyone else, but why do I need to live in fear? 22 AJ: Right, this is who I am. I can’t! I have no other choice, actually. 23 TS: If - Exactly. It’s like, I’m going crazy inside here trying to be something that I’m not. I’m not a 24 man. I am a woman, and that needs to reflect in all aspects of my life. 25 AJ: Right. Exactly. 26 TS: Those are the two that I mostly got. When it came time for family, they were the most 27 understanding of it, versus my friends and the community that I was in. Which is - a flip, because 28 normally it’s the community that’s open and embraces you when you’re not getting it from your 29 family, but I got it the flip side. 30 AJ: Were you hanging out in, like - I’m just - black gay space? Like… 31 TS: Predominantly, in the Omaha community, it’s white. 32 AJ: Okay. So these were white children saying this. 33 TS: Yeah. So like, there’s your sunblocks, there’s not - as far as what I know of, there wasn’t another Tygra Slarii 22 The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies University of Minnesota trans girl that I was friends with or really knew of who was on 1 the same spectrum as me. 2 Everyone that i knew that was transitioning was of Latina - who were white enough to pass for 3 white, or they were white. So like - 4 AJ: And they tried to shade you? These were the people who were like, why, and - 5 TS: It was the gay men! 6 AJ: Okay, yeah. 7 TS: The gay men who were like, “I don’t get it.” And that’s who we mostly get it from, because some 8 trans girls still like to date gay men. 9 AJ: Right. 10 TS: And then once you tell the gay men that I’m woman, it just goes flip flop crazy. Like, what do 11 you mean? You know, why do you want to be with a man? Why do you want to be with a gay 12 man? Like, I like what the fuck I like. It is what it is. I was with a gay man for three years, and I 13 like what the hell I like! 14 AJ: Wow. So you talked a little bit about medical stuff, but - you know, and feel free to say “I don’t 15 want to answer this” or not, but you mentioned that you’re on hormones. Have you done any 16 other medical interventions or do you plan to do any? 17 TS: I plan on getting these done. Of course. 18 AJ: So some breaststststs. 19 TS: Get some breaststststs! I’m - like, A-Cup and I wear fillers right now to give me the kind of, like, 20 look, that they’re real. 21 AJ: Mhm. That you desire. 22 TS: But I want a D. I want a D. I want - not knockers, but I want knock. I don’t want knockers, I want 23 knock! Not the knockers. I’ve thought about gender reassignment, I’ve played around with the 24 thought, if that was really going to make me happy or if I’m okay with what I have birthwise, 25 and...it’s still a toss-up for me, there’s no disadvantages and there’s no advantages to it, really, 26 cause I’m happy with what my body has. But I have played around with the thought of 27 “well...this could be another option to be happy as well.” But I’m somebody who also wants 28 kids. So that weighs in a lot for me, because like, I’m ready for kids now, but I’m not in any 29 process to like, go get - like, to have them. Like, I’m ready for them, it’s just - the areas of 30 wanting to make it happen ain’t there. And at some point I’m going to want them. And I know 31 with being on estrogen that decounts my sperm total, however you want to say it, so like, going 32 through that and listing that, you know, whenever I want to actually start back, I’m going to 33 have to go off hormones for three months, to get my sperm count back up to where it needs to 34 be in order to have said kids. So it’s like, is that - am I okay with fully letting go of that dream of 35 having kids, or am I wanting to stay? 36 AJ: You can always freeze your … Tygra Slarii 23 The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies University of Minnesota TS: 1 That is expensive! 2 AJ: I’m just saying, it’s an option! 3 TS: That was like the first thing my doctor told me, she was like, well you can freeze, that is 4 expensive, okay? I get a child is expensive but you want me to do some more money on saving 5 the sperm to have the child that’s even gonna be more expensive, I’ll just go with Option A. 6 AJ: Okay! You are crazy! 7 TS: I’m just saying, if I’m going to end up spending a lot of money, I’d rather spend a lot of money 8 on the actual child! 9 AJ: On the child! Right. 10 TS: When they are present and in front of me, versus keeping them in a bank for three-some years 11 and then being like “All right!” I’ve been paying $1200 a month for you! 12 AJ: You better be a good kid! 13 TS: You better get some good DNA outta you! 14 AJ: What do you think the agenda is for the transgender community, Tygra? Or, even if there is an 15 agenda? I don’t know. 16 TS: I’m not sure if I can speak for the whole entire trans community, but I think for me, visibility is 17 the biggest thing that I’m not seeing from my trans community. There are strong protesters, 18 advocates, fighters, who are out there, but there’s only a good hundred of them when that 19 community is in the thousands and probably in the hundreds of thousands. 20 AJ: Sure. Hundreds of thousands. 21 TS: And those people are not along and fighting the good fight when we need all of us, like, all of us 22 - so visibility, for me, is the biggest, I’m like “Come on, speak up, speak out, stop trying to be 23 part of the cis society, and come be in front with us.” Allies as well, but I’m really speaking to 24 those of the trans community, you need to step out and stop trying to be a part of the cis 25 society. You’re not cis. 26 AJ: Yeah. Yeah. 27 TS: You’re not. Like, I hate to say it, as much as we’re all trying to fight to be part of the cis society, 28 we’re not. We’re just not. We’re a different breed. 29 AJ: Yeah. We’re unique. 30 TS: We’re a different breed! Like, we - and I’ll always say better - better than the cis society. Like, 31 why would you want to be a part of a form that you’re told these are your only two gender 32 roles? And you have to live by these gender roles? Why? You’re in the trans community, you 33 already were a gender role that you were forced, and now you get to authentically be yourself! 34 Why go back and try to fit into that other gender role, knowing you don’t fit in? 35 AJ: Right. Exactly. Yeah. Yeah. Tygra Slarii 24 The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies University of Minnesota TS: Like, for me, visibility is - well, it’s not on my priority list, but it’s one of the 1 number ones that I 2 would love to see. 3 AJ: Okay. Absolutely. Where do you think the community will be fifty years from now? 4 TS: It’s funny but I think everyone is trans, they just haven’t tapped into that part of they brain. It’s 5 funny, but there’s - to see that there are thousands upon thousands of people of this trans 6 community, this is not something new. This is something that’s been happening. 7 AJ: No. Since the beginning of people on the planet! 8 TS: If someone was to say Adam and Eve, but - like, this has been happening for years! We’re not 9 new, we’re just something that wasn’t paid attention to. We were kind of like that role that we 10 just got to ease on by until we really started to be oppressed, and then we needed to fight to be 11 un-oppressed, and that’s where the visibility comes in. But I think a great portion of the 12 population is going to end up being trans. 13 AJ: Wow. Or at least, maybe become more aware of the fluidity of gender and - 14 TS: Queer. 15 AJ: Queer. Right. 16 TS: Yes. Queer might be the - instead of it being LGBT, maybe it just being queer. Everyone’s just 17 part of the queer nation. 18 AJ: Wow. Well, I’m just fascinated that you have joined our community here in Minneapolis. 19 TS: I’m happy to be here. 20 AJ: You kind of just picked up everything and made the choice to come to this very cold place. For 21 love! Right? 22 TS: Love was not the only reason I came up here! 23 AJ: Okay! All right. 24 TS: Though everyone thinks I just high tailed my little tail up here for love, but I plan on going back 25 to college and I wanted a different scene of drag, and...I think I just overstayed my welcome in 26 Omaha and it was time for a change. 27 AJ: Time for a change. 28 TS: And Minneapolis seems to be that great change. 29 AJ: Yeah. Well, it seems like you’ve got a lot going on for yourself and a beautiful future ahead of 30 you. Tygra, is there anything that I didn’t ask you that you want to make sure you say? 31 TS: I don’t think so. I think we covered all the bases. I’m happy that I got to meet you, and I’m 32 happy that our friendship is flourishing, and I can’t wait to see where that goes. 33 AJ: Oh, absolutely. That’s going to continue. Yes. Tygra Slarii 25 The Transgender Oral History Project Tretter Collection in GLBT Studies University of Minnesota TS: I’m just excited to get to work, pretty much. I think we covered all the bases. I’m 1 just sitting over 2 here like a nervous little puppy playing with this one knee. 3 AJ: Okay. Well, I guess I have one more question, cause you’re - I’m sitting there looking at you and 4 your paint - your makeup, your face, is just flawless. Are you like Beyonce, did you wake up like 5 this? 6 TS: This process - it’s a long process, about an hour and a half. Mostly it’s so long because I sit there 7 and look at myself in the mirror, like, you want to make sure all your lines and everything, so 8 you’re like… 9 AJ: So you contour - 10 TS: Yes. Contour, highlight, the whole nine yards. 11 AJ: Highlight...you do your brows. 12 TS: Girl, if you watched me do my brows, you’d be surprised. Everyone’s always surprised when I 13 show them how I do my brows. 14 AJ: Okay. 15 TS: Because I don’t use Anastasia Beverly Hills brow - I use a sharpie. And everyone’s like, really? 16 AJ: A sharpie?! 17 TS: A sharpie. A brown sharpie. It don’t look like no sharpie, do it? 18 AJ: No...does it wash off? 19 TS: Yup. But it gives me the aesthetic that I want, you know. I like my brows to be predominant, I 20 like them to stand out, I don’t like them to sweat off. So I use a sharpie. It’s just easy. 21 AJ: Okay. Wow! That’s fascinating! 22 TS: Easy beautiful trans girl! 23 AJ: Easy beautiful trans girl. I love it I love it I love it. 24 TS: Slogan! 25 AJ: Yes. All right dear, well, I really appreciate the opportunity to sit here and talk with you for an 26 hour and - until we meet again! 27 TS: I give it two weeks! 28 AJ: Peace. 29 TS: Love it.